WANDS WORTH 4388 WAN 3 FORTY-FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Board of Works FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT Being for the Year ended 25th March, 1897; TO WHICH IS APPENDED THE Annual Report of the Medical Officers of Health FOR THE YEAR 1896. London: POTTER, BATTEN & DAVIES, 23, THE PAVEMENT,CLAPHAM COMMON,S.W. MIDCCCXCVII. FORTY-FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Board of Works FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT Being for the Year ended 25th March, 1897; TO WHICH IS APPENDED THE Annual Report of the Medical Officer of Health FOR THE YEAR 1896. London: POTTER, BATTEN & DAVIES, 23, THE PAVEMENT,CLAPHAM COMMON,S.W. MDCCCXCVII. INDEX. PAGE Adulteration of Food, &e., Acts 23,76 Agricultural Rates Act 29 Apportionments (New Streets) 34 Area of Parishes in District 79 Attendance of Members, Return of 8 Beverley Brook 31 Buildings, Notices for New 72 Cab Radius 28 Census Returns 79 Chairman, Election of 33 Committees, List of 7 Contracts, Statement of 80 Costermongers 27 Drainage, proposed bye-laws 24 Drains, Combined 25 Dusting and Scavenging 66 Establishment Expenditure 82 Equalisation of Rates Act 76 Feathers Wharf, Wandsworth 63 Highways, Materials used in repairing 43 Horses and Stables Establishment, Clapham 47 „ „ „ „ Putney 51 Huguenot Cemetery 32 Lighting 73 Loans Appendix A Lock and Weir on the Thames 30 Local Government of the District 30 Materials used in repairing highways 43 Medical Officers of Health, Annual Report of Appendix B Members of the Board, List of 5 Metropolitan Water Commission 16 Metropolitan Water Companies Bill 17 Mews, &c., Paving and Draining 25 New Roads, Plans of 36 b 2 INDEX.— Continued. page New Streets, Loans for Paving 26 Officers, List of 10 Parliament, Bills in 18 Paving Works, Improvements, &c.—Clapham 45 „ „ „ Putney 49 „ „ „ Streatham 54 „ „ „ Tooting 58 ,, „ „ Wandsworth 59 Population, Area, and Rateable Value of District 79 Private Drains 42 Rateable value of Parishes in District 79 Rates levied by Overseers 78 Receipts and Payments Account 84-5 „ „ „ in detail Appendix A Recreation Ground, Putney Bridge Road 33 Re-naming streets and re-numbering houses 37 Roads, Length of, repaired by Board 44 Sale of Food and Drugs Bill 23 Scavenging and Dusting 66 School Board for London Elections Bill 21 „ Payments to 77 „ Proposed site for School, Broom- hill Road, Wandsworth 33 Sewers, Ventilating Shafts, and Gullies, Construction of 38—41 Slop Shoot, Southfields, Wandsworth 63 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Bill 17 Southwark and Yauxhall Water Company's main from Hampton to Nunhead 32 Steam Road Rollers 45, 53, 56, 65 Street Noises 24 Sums owing to and by the Board 83 Tents, Vans, &c., bye-laws 24 Vaccination Acts 29 Watering Roads, Cost, &c., of 70 Water Companies Regulations 23 Water Supply 13—17 Water Transfer Bills promoted by London County Council 13 The Board of Works for the Wandsworth District. LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD, Showing the year in which they go out of office. PARISHES. NAMES. SSES. CLAPHAM 1899 Aldridge, George 32, The Pavement. 1899 Comins, Thos. Edward 86, Abbeville Road, Clapham Common. 1910 Dunkley, William The Rockery, North Road, Clapham Park. 1900 Gibson, James Henry 19, Macaulay Road. 1900 Gilchrist, George Mathieson 29, Crescent Lane. 1898 Grautoff, Augustus Henry Ellerslie, King's Road. 1898 58, North Street. 1898 Lethbridge, Joseph 59, The Chase. 1899 Lidiard, John Henley Lodge, Clapham Common. 1899 Osburn, Henry 24, Cedars Road. 1898 O'Sullivan, James Alexander 6, Elms Road. 1899 Oxley, Alfred 9, Clapham Park Road. 1900 Simmons, John 647, Wandsworth Road. 1900 Wright, Thos. John 272, Wandsworth Road. 1898 Young, Thomas 36, Union Road. PUTNEY 1898 Betts, Thomas 226, Upper Richmond Road. 1899 Evered,Richard Brown 274, Upper Richmond Road. 1899 Gay, John 119, Upper Richmond Road. 1898 Gilbert, Thomas 30, Carlton Road. 1899 Harvey, John Park Road, Roehampton. 1900 Hewett, William Fairhaven,Dryburgh Road. 1900 Jones, William Henry 18,Dealtry Road. 1900 Maples, Jarvis 39,Montserrat Road. 1898 Salter, William 248, Upper Richmond Road. STREATHAM 1898 Bailey, Samuel F. Stanmore,Tierney Road,Streatham. 1898 Boddam, General H. 155, Croxted Road, West Dulwich. 1899 Dickinson, William 135, Bedford Hill, Balham. 1899 Essex, Richard Walter Abbotsford,19,Thirlmere Road,Streatham. 1900 Franklin, Jas. William 13,Laitwood Road,Balham. 1898 Russell House,Balham. 1899 Hare, Benjamin Bedford Hill,Balham. 1898 James, S. H. 3, Douglas Villas, Greyhound Lane 1900 Knapp,Frederick A. Selwyn ouse, 39,Knollys Road, Streatham. 1899 Knobel, Capt. WilliamRoberts 47, High Road,Streatham. 1900 Laceby, Coulson The Railway Tavern, Greyhound Lane,Streatham. 1899 Martin, Henry John Paragon Parade, Brixton Hill. 1899 Mineard, George Edward Northwood,Rydal Road,Streatham. 1898 Pullan, Francis Joseph 2, Tooting Bec Road, Upper Tooting 1900 Ridley, William Woodbatch,21, Mount Ephraim Road, Streatham. 1900 Simpson, Robert, M.A The Hawthorns, 234,Balham High Road. 1898 Weir, Benjamin, J.P. (Chairman of the Board). The Hawthorns, Grove Road, Clapham Park. 1900 Wellborne, Charles E. 28, Gleneldon Road, Streatham. 6 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD —continued. PARISHES. NAMES. SSES. TOOTING 1900 Fisher, James Edwin 1,Defoe Road. 1899 Mellhuish,William P. Colham,Garratt Lane. 1898 Stowell,Charles Edward Hereford Lodge,Mitcham Road. WANDSWORTH . 1899 Cresswell,Samuel 48, Lebanon Gardens. 1898 Dennv,Jonathan 76, East Hill. 1898 Ennis,George 18,Dorlcote Road. 1898 Evershed, Edwin 7, Red Lion Street. 1900 Holland, Col. Arthur Gambie??? Gayton Lodge, Wimbledon Common 1898 Howell,T. A. I. Cleeve House, West Hill. 1900 Howick,George 95, High Street. 1999 Milestone,W. C Somerset Lodge,Garratt Lane. 1900 Musto,Walter 246,Earlsfield Road. 1899 Pincham,Thomas 77, High Street. 1899 Potter, John Charles Westow,Keswick Road. 1900 Read, William J Oakleigh,35,Earlsfield Road. 1899 Roe, A. Dumville 47, West Hill. 1899 Seaman, Owen 77, West Hill. 1898 Stroulger,Isaac 273, Trinity Road, Wandsworth Common. 1900 Whcatley,William Coe 173, Trinity Road, Upper Tooting. 1900 Willcox,James 1, The Terrace, Upper Richmond Rd. 1898 Wise, James 20,Earlsfield Road. 7 LIST OF COMMITTEES. FINANCE COMMITTEE. Messrs. Aldridge, Messrs. Maples, Messrs. Stowell, Comins, Dickinson, Denny, Dunkley, Gurney, Ennis, Gilchrist, Hare, Milestone, Young, Laceby, Pincham, Betts, Martin, Read, Hewett, Weir, J.P. Willcox. GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE. Messrs. Dunkley, Messrs. Maples, Messrs. Stowell, Gibson, Gurney, Ennis, Lidiard, Hare, Howell, Osburu, Martin, Howick, Oxley, Mineard, Read, Gay, Simpson, Stroulger, Hewett, Weir, J.P. Wise. SANITARY COMMITTEE. Messrs. Grautoff, Messrs. Jones, Messrs. Weir, J.P. Jenkins, Boddam, Holland, Lethbridge, Dickinson, Howell, Simmons, Essex, Howick, Wright, Hare, Milestone, Betts, Franklin, Musto, Gay, Knapp. Roe. 8 RETURN showing the Number of Attendances of Members at the Board and Committee Meetings for the year ended 25th March, 1897. No. of Board Meetings held 26 No. of Putney Local Committee Sub-Committee Meetings held 10 „ Special Board Meetings held 7 ,, Finance Committee Meetings held 13 „ Streatham & Tooting Local Committee Meetings held 27 „ General Purposes Committee Meetings held 50 „ „ Sub-Committee Meetings held 30 „ „ „ „ Sub-Committee Meetings held 2 „ Streatham Special Road Widening Committee Meetings held 4 ,, Sanitary Committee Meetings held 12 ,, Clapham Local Committee Meetings 24 „ Wandsworth Local Committee Meetings held 28 „ „ Sub-Committee Meetings held 19 „ „ „ Sub-Committee Meetings held 26 ,, Putney Local Committee Meetings 34 „ Conferences and Deputations to other Authorities 8 „ Special Committee Meetings held 4 NAMES OF MEMBERS. No. of Board Meetings attended. No. of Special Board Meetings attended. No. of Finance Committee Meetings attended. No. of General Purposes Committee Meetings attended. No. of General Purposes Committee Sub-Committee Meetings attended. No. of Sanitary Committee Meetings attended. No. of Local Committee Meetings attended. No. of Local Committee SubCommittee Meetings attended. No. of Streatham Special Road Widening Committee Meetings attended. No. of Special Committee Meetings No. of Conferences and Deputations to other Authorities attended. Total Number of Meetings attended. KS.0 Aldridge, George 9 1 ... ... ... ... 18 ... ... ... ... 28 Ashdown, Thos. Jabez 22 5 ... ... ... ... 23 3 3 ... ... 56 Bailey, Samuel F. 25 5 ... ... ... ... 25 16 ... ... ... 71 Bayly, E. H. 5 I ... ... ... ... 9 ... ... ... ... 15 Betts, Thomas 4 1 ... ... ... 0 28 6 ... ... ... 39 Boddam, General H. 18 4 ... ... ... 7 19 1 ... ... ... 49 Buchanan, W. E. 25 5 ... 36 ... ... 27 20 ... ... ... 113 Elected a Member of the General Purposes Committee, June, 1896. Bulcraig, Henry 13 4 ... 11 ... ... 21 5 ... ... ... 51 Collett, John 4 2 ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... ... 13 Comins, Thomas E. 18 5 8 ... ... ... 20 10 ... ... ... 61 Cress well, Samuel 19 6 ... ... ... ... 18 14 ... ... ... 57 Elected June, 1896. Curtis, Rev. Hubert 15 2 ... ... ... ... 12 1 ... ... ... 30 Denny, Jonathan 19 7 8 ... ... ... ??? 7 ... 1 ... 58 Dickinson, William 22 7 11 ... ... 9 26 20 4 ... 2 101 Elected a Member of Sanitary Committee June, 1890. Dodson, A. E. 6 0 ... ... ... 4 15 4 ... ... ... 29 Dunkley, William 22 7 11 32 1 ... 14 7 ... ... 2 96 E???nis, George 17 3 7 14 ... ... 20 3 ... ... ... 64 Elected a Member of General Purposes Committee, June, 1896. Essex, Richard Walter 9 3 ... ... ... 3 14 1 ... ... ... 30 lected a Member of Sanitary Committee, June, 1896. Evered, R. B. 10 4 ... ... ... ... 12 2 ... ... ... 28 Elected June, 1896. Evershed, Edwin 0 0 ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... ... ... 0 Fisher, James E. 10 4 ... ... ... ... 19 4 ... ... ... 37 Elected June, 1896. Gay, John 16 6 3 28 7 1 63 Elected a Member of Sanitary Committee, June, 1896. Gibson, James Henry 14 3 ... 17 ... 7 9 3 ... ... 1 54 Gordon, Edwin 0 0 ... ... ... ... 2 1 ... ... ... 3 Went out of office, June, 1896. Grautoff, A. H. 10 4 ... ... ... 2 19 7 ... ... ... 42 Elected a Member of Sanitary Committee, June, 1896. Gurney, Arthur 22 7 10 38 ... ... 19 ... ... ... ... 96 Hare, Benjamin 15 3 10 29 ... 5 22 14 3 ... ... 101 Harvey, John 2 3 ... ... ... 0 20 4 ... ... ... 29 Ceased to be a Member of Sanitary Committee, June, 1896. Hewett, William 20 3 5 30 1 29 8 96 Howell, T. Arthur Ives 15 2 35 ... 6 23 10 ... ... 1 92 Howick, George 25 5 ... 46 1 8 21 19 ... ... ... 125 James, S. H. 10 2 ... ... ... 1 24 8 ... ... ... 45 Resigned Membership of Sanitary Committee June, 1896. Jenkins, Thomas 5 1 ... ... ... 2 7 ... ... ... ... 15 9 NAMES OF MEMBERS. No. of Board Meetings attended No. of Special Board Meetings attended. No. of Finance Committee Meetings attended. No. of General Purposes Committee Meetings attended. No. of General Purposes Committee Sub-Committee Meetings attended. No. of Sanitary Committee Meetings attended. No. of Local Committee Meetings attended. No. of Local Committee SubCommittee Meetings attended. No. of Streatham Special Road Widening Committee Meetings attended. No. of Special Committee Meetings attended. No. of Conferences and Deputations to other Authorities attended. Total Number of Meetings attended. KS. Jones. Wm. Henry 1 2 ... ... ... 0 23 8 ... ... ... 29 Ker, Hugh 2 0 ... ... ... 1 5 ... ... ... ... 8 Knobel, Capt. W. R. 20 6 ... ... ... ... 17 ... ... ... ... 43 Elected June, 1896. Laceby, Coulson 18 5 4 ... ... ... 17 2 1 ... ... 47 Lethbridge, Joseph 7 0 ... ... ... ... 19 1 ... ... ... 27 Lewis, Bernard 11 5 6 ... ... ... 16 11 ... ... ... 49 Lidiard, John 20 7 ... 30 0 ... 20 1 ... ... 2 80 Maples. Jarvis 18 6 7 30 0 24 7 ... ... ... 92 Martin, Henry J. 19 7 9 ... ... ... 23 18 4 2 3 85 Mellhuish,Wm. P. 1 0 ... ... ... ... 8 5 ... ... 2 16 Milestone,W. C. 19 5 6 ... ... 4 20 11 ... ... ... 65 Mineard,George E. 13 3 ... 18 ... 0 18 11 ... ... ... 63 Ceased to be a Member of Sanitary Committee and elected a Member of General Purposes Committee, June, 1896. Musto, Walter 22 5 ... ... ... 7 25 6 ... ... ... 65 Osburn, Henry 9 2 4 ... ... 0 10 1 ... ... ... 26 Ceased to be a Member of Sanitary Committee, June, 1896. O'Sullivan,J. A. 1 0 3 14 18 Oxley,Alfred 22 6 ... 33 ... ... 24 6 ... ... ... 91 Perry, John 1 0 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Resigned June, 1896. Phillips, Richard 11 4 ... ... ... 7 14 2 ... ... ... 38 Pincham,Thomas 23 0 10 ... ... ... 27 ... ... 1 ... 67 Potter, John Charles 18 4 ... ... ... ... 20 1 ... 1 ... 44 Elected June, 1896. Read, William James 21 7 6 16 ... ... 23 2 ... ... ... 75 Roe, A. Dumville 14 1 ... 2 ... 3 17 2 ... 1 ... 40 Ceased to be a Member of General Purposes Committee, and elected a Member of Sanitary Committee, June, 1896. Salter, W. 14 1 ... ... ... ... 19 6 ... ... ... 40 Selwood, Wm. Raine 5 1 ... ... ... ... 4 2 ... ... ... 12 Went out of office June, 1896. Simpson. Robert, M.A 4 1 ... 3 ... ... 4 1 ... ... ... 13 Went out of office June, 1896. Smith, George Thomas 3 1 ... 5 ... 1 3 ... ... ... ... 13 Went out of office June, 1896. Stedman, Chas. M., F.S.I 10 1 ... 18 0 3 12 8 ... ... 0 52 Stowell, Chas. Edward 15 1 4 22 1 ... 7 ... ... ... 1 51 Stroulger, Isaac 23 5 ... 44 1 ... 25 ... ... ... ... 98 Thorn, Alexander 8 3 5 15 ... ... 25 7 ... ... 63 Weir, Benjamin, J. P., 23 7 11 42 0 5 21 11 3 ... 1 126 Wellborne, Charles E. 19 5 ... 24 0 ... 24 6 ... ... ... 78 Willcox, James 19 7 6 ... ... ... 19 2 ... 1 ... 54 Wise, James 12 5 ... ... ... ... 23 15 ... ... ... 55 Young, Thomas 17 6 ... ... ... 5 18 2 ... ... ... 48 Note.— A dotted line (...) in a column signifies that the Member of the Board opposite whose name it is placed is not a Member of the Committee named at the head of such column. 10 LIST OF THE OFFICERS OF THE BOARD. Names. Offices. Addresses. ies. Hills, Henry George Clerk Offices of the Board, East Hill, Wandsworth £600 per annum Richards, Charles F. First Office Clerk Ditto. £220 „ Ellis, Edward J. Second Ditto Ditto. £152 10s. „ Haddock, William C. Third Ditto Ditto. £2 13s. per week Waters, Charles J. Fourth Ditto Ditto. £1 13s. 6d. „ Thorne, Arthur W. Junior Clerks Ditto. £1 5s. ,, Earwaker, Wm. T. Ditto. £1 2s. 6d. „ Meyer, Frederick S. Ditto. 17/6 „ Squires, Fredk. R. Ditto. 15/- Durrant, Charles C. First Collecting Clerk Ditto. £160 per annum Stonehewer, Daniel A. Second Ditto Ditto. £130 „ South am, Arthur Surveyor for Clapham 144, High Street,Clapham £476 Radford, John Charles 153, High Street, Putney £475 Marten, Henry James Ditto, Streatham 158,Streatham High Road £380 „ Ditto, Tooting £50 „ Dodd, Peter Ditto, Wandsworth 41, High Street, Wandsworth £380 „ Field, Oliver, M.D. Medical Officer of Health, Clapham Gardner House, Clapham Common, North Side £200 „ Orr,William Young, M.B. Ditto, Putney Kenmore, Upper Richmond Road, Putney £200 „ Sutton,FieldFlowers,MD. Ditto,Streatham Balham Hill £200 „ Brock, C. de Lisle Ditto, Tooting Alstone Lawn, Tooting £46 „ Smith, P. Caldwell,M.D. Ditto, Wandsworth Church Row, Wandsworth £170 Young, Walter William Hertford House, Albert Road, Battersea Park, and 24, Ely Place, E.C. £160 per annum and costs in actions in superior courts. Muter, Dr. John, F.C.S. Analyst under the Sale of Food, &c., Acts 325, Kennington Road 10s. for each analysis made,—not to exceed 600 analyses per annum. Smith, Samuel H. Inspector, ditto Offices of the Board, East Hill, Wandsworth £2 10s. per week Hake, H. Wilson, Ph. D., F.I.C., F.C.S. Gas Examiner Westminster Hospital Medical School, Caxton Street, S.W. £12 10s. per quarter. Coote, Thomas C. Messenger and Office Keeper Offices of the Board, East Hill, Wandsworth £2 per week, apartments, coals, and gas. Crane, Wm. F. Office Boy Ditto. 7/6 per week. 11 LIST OP OFFICERS—Continued. Parishes. Names. Offices. ies* Clapham Young, E. G. Surveyor's Assistant £3 3s. per week. Weaver, E. R. „ „ £2 Fairchild, S. G. Sanitary Inspector £3 5s. „ Nurcombe, B. „ „ £3 5s. ,, Crabbe, W. G. „ „ £2 18s. 6d. „ Bradshaw, A. Dusting Inspector £1 10s. „ Haddock, H. F. Clerk £2 „ £1 3s. „ Chasemore, A. E. Surveyor's Assistant £3 „ Blackmore, H. G. „ „ £1 15s. „ Barfett, W. J. E. „ „ £1 „ Sanitary Inspector £3 5s. „ Orme, G. L. Assistant ,, £2 2s. „ / Streatham and Tooting 1 Bartholomew, Walter Surveyor's Assistant £3 15s. ,, Clerk £3 „ Quinlan, Percy „ £1 9s. „ Dyason, W. „ £1 „ Janes, Walter Draughtsman, &c. £1 10s. „ Tracing Clerk 17s. Kershaw, Edward Sanitary Inspector £3 „ Brown, Robert Assistant „ £2 12s. 6d. „ Addison, Scott „ „ £2 4a. 6d. „ Jones, James „ „ £1 17s. 6d. „ Ratcliffe, John Dusting Inspector £1 15s. „ Wandswohth Allen, G. W. Draughtsman £2 10s. „ Gadsby, S. J. Clerk £2 „ Tracing Clerk 15s. „ Boulton, C. V. Clerk £1 1s. „ Crane, S. Sanitary Inspector £3 5s. ,, Weeks, Alfred James Assistant Inspector £2 8s. 6d. „ Hatton, Charles „ „ £2 8s. 6d. „ Palmer, H. A. „ „ £2 4s. 6d. „ Hollis, J. „ „ £2 6s. „ Earwaker, G. Dusting Inspector £2 „ 13 FORTY-FIRST ANNUAL REPORT THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT, Being for the Year ended 25th March, 1897. London Water Supply. The Metropolitan Counties Water Board Bill, referred to in last year's annual report, did not pass, and the London County Council have again introduced into Parliament Bills for acquiring the undertakings of the several Metropolitan Water Companies. The Bills were considered by the General Purposes Committee, who recommended the Board to forward a copy of the following reasons for objecting to the scheme to the Members of Parliament for this District, with a request that they would oppose the Bills on second reading :— 1.— The control of the water supply to so large a population, and the carrying on of such an immense business as would be formed by the amalgamation of the eight Water Companies, should be under a Board of Management composed of persons who possess special knowledge and experience, and such Board should be exclusively occupied in the management of the water supply. 2.— The Water Committee which under the provisions of the Bills would have the management of the water supply is to be a Committee of the Council. Seven-eighths of the members are to be appointed by, 14 and must be members, of the Council, and the remaining Members are to be appointed by the Common Council of the City. The control would therefore be in the hands of the Council. 3.— The London County Council has sufficient work on its hands in carrying out the very extensive and increasing duties which already devolve upon it under the numerous Acts of Parliament relating to the government of the County of London. 4.— The Bills would transfer to the service of the Council a staff of some thousands of officers and workmen, which a body like the Council, with so many other duties to carry out, could not control with efficiency and economy. 5.— It would appear, from the proceedings of the Council and from the opinions which have been expressed on their behalf, that they are prejudiced against the present system of supply in London, notwithstanding the report of the Royal Commission of 1893 t0 the effect that the water as supplied to the consumer in London is of a very high standard of excellence and of purity, and that it is suitable in quality for all household purposes; and with respect to the quantity of water to be obtained within the watersheds of the Thames and the Lea that if the proposals recommended by theC ommission were adopted a sufficient supply to meet the wants of the Metropolis for a long time to come might be found without any prejudice to the claims, or material injury to the interests, of any district outside the area of Greater London, If the control of the water supply be placed in the hands of the Council great expense would in all probability be incurred by them in obtaining a supply from Wales, instead of making fuller and better use of the present sources of supply. It may be added that the Commission approved of a proposal for the construction of storage reservoirs in the Thames Valley, and that powers for proceeding with the construction of two reservoirs were obtained in the last Session of Parliament by a Joint Committee representing three of the Metropolitan Water Companies. 6.— The motion at the Meeting of the Council on the 10th November last to introduce the Bills now in question was met by an amendment to the effect that the purchase of the undertakings should be subject to a provision that in the event of an Act being passed in this Session constituting an authority to deal with the Metropolitan water supply the Bills should be read as if such authority had been named therein instead of the Council; that the Government should be requested to introduce a Bill constituting an authority to deal with the water supply of the area now supplied by the Water Companies, and to appoint a Special Commission to enquire as to the relations between London and the outside areas, and for other purposes in connection with the matter. This 15 amendment was lost by 59 votes to 48, showing that a considerable minority of the Council were not in favour of the scheme. At the Meeting of the Council held on the 8th December last, when the Bills, as prepared by a Committee were under consideration, amendments to some of the provisions were proposed, and divisions thereon resulted as follows:— 53 votes to 51, and 55 votes to 53; and upon the main question to approve of the Bills there were 61 votes in favour to 54 against. The scheme does not therefore come before Parliament with the full confidence and support of its promoters. 7.— The area of supply of the Metropolitan Water Companies comprises 620 square miles, of which the Metropolis contains only 121 square miles. If a water authority is to be created for the whole of the water area it would be fair and reasonable that the local authorities outside London should be represented on the water authority. If on the other hand the water authority is to have jurisdiction over the Metropolitan area only, and the provisions of the Bill relating to the outside area be acted upon, there would be great and perhaps insurmountable practical difficulties in severing the mains, pipes, and works of distribution, and dividing them amongst a large number of local authorities, and in settling the values of the respective sections of the works and of the rights to be transferred. Assuming, however, that these difficulties can be got over, then, judging from the strong opposition to the scheme hitherto shown by the authorities outside the Metropolitan area, it would be impossible to satisfy those authorities except upon terms which would be to the disadvantage of the Metropolis financially, and which would seriously effect the supply to London of water which is now brought from the districts of such authorities. It is in the districts surrounding the Metropolitan area that the greatest increase of population is to be looked for. The question of the supply of water there is daily becoming of more and more importance, and if all the Local Authorities of those districts are to be also Water Authorities there will be constant competition and disputes amongst them, and between them and the Metropolitan Water Authority, as to the use of sources of supply, leading to expensive litigation. 8.— The Bills now introduced have the same object as the Bills which were promoted by the Council in the Session of 1895, and which were rejected by the House of Commons upon second reading on the 24th March, 1896, by a majority of 287 against 125. A very large sum must have been expended by the Council in the promotion of the Bills of 1895-96, and in Parliamentary and other proceedings and enquiries in connection with the matter, and after such a decisive rejection of their scheme it is submitted that the further expense attending the promotion of the present Bills ought not to be incurred. The Board of Works for 16 the Wandsworth District expended upwards of £300 in opposing the former Bills. The Board have the same objections to the present Bills, and it is unfair that they should so soon be again put to the expense of opposing what is substantially the same scheme. 9.— In the Queen's Speech at the opening of the present Session it is stated that a Bill will be submitted to Parliament to improve the arrangements for Water Supply in the Metropolis, and as the matter is therefore to be dealt with by the Government it is not expedient that private Bills on the same subject should be proceeded with. This Report was adopted, copies were sent to the local members of the County Council, and the Board petitioned against the Bills. The New River Purchase Bill was first dealt with by the House of Commons, and, after debate, was thrown out on second reading by a majority of 258 votes to 123. The London County Council thereupon withdrew the seven other Bills. Metropolitan Water Commission. The Government have since appointed a Royal Commission to enquire into and report upon the subject. The members of the Commission are Lord Llandaff (Chairman), Mr. J. W. Mellor, M.P., Sir J. Dorington, M.P., Sir G. B. Bruce, C.E., Major-General de Courcy Scott, R.E., Mr. de Bock Porter, C.B., Mr. H. W. Cripps, Q.C., and Mr. Robert Lewis. The terms of reference to the commission are as follows:— "(1.) To inquire and report whether, having regard to financial considerations and to present and prospective requirements as regards water supply in the districts within the limits of supply of the metropolitan water companies, it is desirable, in the interests of the ratepayers and water consumers in those districts, that the undertakings of the water companies should be acquired and managed either (a) by one authority, or (b) by several authorities, and, if so, what should be such authority or authorities; to what extent physical severance of the works and other property and sources of supply of the several companies, and the division thereof between different local authorities within the limits of supply, are practicable and desirable, and what are the legal powers necessary to give effect to any such arrangements. 17 "(2.) If the undertakings are not so acquired, whether additional powers of control should be exercised by local or other authorities, and, if so, what those powers should be. "(3.) Whether it is practicable to connect any two or more of the different systems of supply now administered by the eight metropolitan companies, and, if so, by whom and in what proportions should the cost of connecting them be borne, and what are the legal powers necessary to give effect to any such arrangement." Metropolitan Water Companies Bill. A Bill has also been introduced by the Government into the House of Commons to empower water consumers and local authorities to complain to the Railway and Canal Commission of the failure of any Metropolitan Water Company to perform a statutory duty of the Company, and to empower local authorities to aid any water consumer in obtaining the determination of questions with respect to the rights, duties, and liabilities of any of the Metropolitan Water Companies, or the supply of water and the charges made by the companies. The Bill is still in the House of Commons. Southwark and Vauxhall Water Bill. An injunction having been obtained by the Conservators of the River Thames restraining the bouthwark and Vauxhall Company from taking more water than was provided for by the agreement between the Company and the Conservators, the Company have introduced a Bill into Parliament authorising them to take an additional quantity of water from the River Thames. The London County Council decided to oppose the Bill, and communicated with this Board and other local authorities on the subject. The Board, however, came to the conclusion that it was not advisable to oppose the Bill, and informed the Council that in their opinion a clause should be inserted providing that the Bill should not have the effect of increasing the value of the Company's undertaking in the event of the undertaking being at any c 18 future time purchased by a public authority; but that as the present limit of the quantity of water authorised to be taken from the River Thames by the Company had already been exceeded, and in view of the great evils which would arise from any decrease being made in the quantity of water available for the supply of the large district served by the Company, the Board did not object to the provisions of the Bill which authorised the Company, upon agreed terms of payment therefor, to continue to take water from the river in excess of the quantity at present authorised. The Bill is now in Committee of the House of Commons, who have passed the preamble. Bills in Parliament. The following Bills, which have been introduced in the present Session, have also been considered by the Board, viz.:— 1.—London County (Buildings). 2.—London County Council (Sewerage and Drainage). 3.—London County Council (General Powers). 4.—London County Council (Improvements). 5.—Inclusion of Southwark within boundaries of City of London. 6.—Vehicles (Lights). 7.—Rivers Pollution. 8.—Local Authorities Officers' Superannuation. 9.—School Board for London Elections. 10.—Sale of Food and Drugs. 11.—Retirement of Vestrymen and Auditors (London). 12.—London Water Companies (Amalgamation). 13.—Locomotives on Highways. London County (Buildings; Bill. This Bill was promoted by the London County Council to empower the Council to acquire land for the erection and maintenance thereon of buildings and offices for the conduct of the County business adjoining the new thoroughfare between St. James's Park and Charing Cross in contemplation by H.M. Commissioners of Works. The estimated cost was £851,000, and the money required to be raised for 19 the purpose was to be repaid within 60 years. The Bill was rejected on second reading. London County Council (Sewerage and Drainage). One of the Clauses of this Bill would have empowered the Council to make bye-laws requiring that proper plans and sections of the drains and drainage arrangements in houses erected after the passing of the Act shall be supplied to Sanitary Authorities. The number of notices of alterations to drains received by the Board are almost as numerous as the notices received for the erection of new buildings, and it is evident that the deposit of plans is as necessary in the one case as in the other. The Board, therefore, requested the London County Council to extend the application of the proposed bye-laws to alterations to existing drains. The Council, . however, were advised that their advertised notice of the Bill would not permit of the clause being altered in the manner suggested. The Board were of opinion that the absence of power to require plans of alterations to and reconstruction of existing drains was a serious defect of the Bill, and they took steps with the view of procuring an amendment of the clause when the Bill came before the Committee of the House of Commons. Objection to the clause was also raised in other quarters, and the Council decided to withdraw it. The Board have now suggested to the Council that the object of the clause would be best met by obtaining an sxtension of the existing provisions of the Metropolis Management Acts which require notice to be given of intended laying of drains, so as to provide that the notice shall be accompanied by such plans and particulars as the local authority may require. London County Council (General PowersI of London, c 2 This Bill is to empower the Council to make street improvements in various parts including the widening of Battersea Park 20 Road at an estimated cost of £20,930, towards which the Battersea Vestry is to contribute one-fourth. The Bill also contains provisions enabling the Council, and Vestries and District Boards with the consent of the Council, to erect and maintain in disused burial grounds under their control any offices, workshops, sheds or other buildings necessary or convenient for the proper management and control of such places as open spaces or public recreation grounds; and section 92 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, is extended by the Bill so as to authorise Sanitary Authorities to agree with the Council to provide and maintain accommodation for the holding of inquests in connection with a mortuary or other building belonging to the Sanitary Authority. The Board suggested to the Council that, in view of the difficulty of obtaining sites for mortuaries,steps should be taken to amend the Disused Burial Grounds Acts, 1884, by providing that mortuaries erected by Sanitary Authorities should not be considered buildings within the meaning of the Act, which, as it stands, prevents the erection of mortuaries and even the extension of existing mortuaries in disused burial grounds. The Committee of the Council, who had the matter under consideration, were adverse to a general amendment of the Act, but thought that each case should be treated on its merits and that any particular authority requiring power to erect or extend a mortuary on such grounds should take steps to promote legislation on the subject. The Bill has been amalgamated with the Sewerage and Drainage Bill, and, as amended, has passed the House of Commons. Inclusion of Southwark within the City. The object of this Bill was to include Southwark within the boundaries of the City of London. The Board informed the promoters that they agreed with the proposal, but they took no 21 other steps in the matter. The Bill was negatived on second reading in the House of Commons. Vehicles (Lights). This Bill, which has again been introduced into Parliament by Mr. P. M. Thornton, the Member for Clapham, provides that vehicles on highways should carry lights after dark. The Board petitioned Parliament in favour of the Bill, and it has been read a second time. Superannuation Bill. A Bill has been introduced into Parliament providing for the superannuation of omcers ana servants in the employment of Vestries and District Boards and other local authorities throughout the country, such officers and servants contributing a certain per centage of their salaries. Having in view the provisions of the Act of 1866 (2g Vic., cap. 31) relating to the superannuation of officers of Vestries and District Boards and other parochial bodies in London, the Board were of opinion that it was not advisable to take any steps in the matter. The Bill has not yet reached second reading. School Board for London (Elections). This Bill provided that in lieu of the present School Board divisions in the ivieuupuiis, every undivided parliamentary borough and every division of every divided parliamentary borough shall return one member to the School Board, except that the City of London shall be entitled to return two members. The Board presented the following petition in favour of the Bill, viz. :— To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in Parliament assembled. The Humble Petition of the Board of Works for the Wandsworth District, under their Common Seal. Sheweth :— 1.—That your Petitioners are the Local Authority, constituted under the Metropolis Management Acts, for the District of Wandsworth, which 22 comprises the parishes of Clapham, Putney, Streatham, Tooting, and Wandsworth, having an area of over fourteen-and-a-half square miles, a population of about 190,000, and a rateable value of ^"1,277,688. 2.—That the Precepts of the School Board for London for the Wandsworth District are served upon your Petitioners and the amounts of such Precepts raised by your Petitioners and paid by them into the School Board Fund. 3.—That a Bill (hereinafter referred to as " the Bill") has been introduced into your Honourable House, intituled " A Bill to alter the Divisions of London for the Election of the School Board." 4.—That the fourth clause of the Bill provides that for the purpose of the next triennial election of Members and of all subsequent elections of Members of the School Board for London, every undivided Parliamentary Borough in the Metropolis, and every division of every divided Parliamentary Borough in the Metropolis, shall be a Division entitled to return one Member of the School Board for London, except that the City of London shall be entitled to return two Members. 5.—Your Petitioners are of opinion that many of the existing School Board Electoral Divisions are too large; and this is especially the case with regard to the West Lambeth Division, of which your Petitioners' District forms part. Such extensive areas for electoral purposes are in all respects disadvantageous, inasmuch as Members are not so accessible, nor so well known to their constituents, and it is difficult for them to make themselves thoroughly acquainted with the requirements of their District; moreover the expense of contesting these large constituencies throws a heavy and unnecessary burden upon candidates. 6.—Your Petitioners are further of opinion that the cumulative system of voting now in force at School Board Elections ought to be abolished, as it results in the election of candidates who obtain the support of fewer voters than the number of voters who support some of the unsuccessful candidates. 7.—That the provisions of the Bill if carried into effect will remedy the above-mentioned defects of the existing law with regard to the election of Members of the School Board for London. 8.—That your Petitioners desire especially to urge upon your Honourable House the desirability of the amendment of the law in the manner provided by the Bill being effected before the Election of Members of the School Board for London in November next. The Bill was thrown out on second reading in the House of Commons. 23 Sale of Food and Drugs Bill. This Bill has been introduced into Parliament by Mr. Kearley, who was a member of Sir Walter Foster's Committee on Food Products, which inquired into the subject two years ago. The Bill embodies this Board's proposal, adopted at the Conference of Local Authorities on the subject, to the effect that a person summoned for adulterating an article who relies upon a written warranty shall summon before the Court the person upon whose warranty he relies, and that the person so giving the warranty may be proceeded against. The Board have not taken any action in the matter at present, as it is understood that the question will be dealt with by the Government. The Board took no action with regard to the other Bills before mentioned. Water Companies' Regulations. At the request of the London County Council an Inquiry was held by the Local ijovernment Board, at which this Board gave evidence, as to the desirability of altering the Water Companies' Regulations, and especially the regulation which limits the capacity of the flushing cistern to two gallons. The decision of the Local Government Board was to the following effect, viz. :— i—That the Local Government Board were not prepared to alter the existing regulations so as to substitute three for two gallons as the maximum amount of water to be used as a flush for a water-closet. 2.—That they saw no objection to the regulations being amended so as to include in the definition of water-closet any sink used for receiving any solid or liquid excremental filth. 3.—That they were advised that the suggested regulation which would prevent cisterns being brought into use for supplying water for domestic purposes or for food for beasts so long as they directly supplied any water-closet or sink used for receiving any solid or liquid filth was designed not for the purpose of preventing the pollution of water, but For the purpose of preventing the use of water that was liable to pollution, and did not therefore come within the scope of the regulations required to be made under sec. 17 of the Metropolis Water Act, and 24 that, moreover, it appeared to them that the object of the proposed regulation was attained by No. 3 of the Bye-Laws made by the County Council, under sec: 39 (1) of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. 4.—That they were advised that the suggested regulation which would provide that in all cases where any premises had a constant water service one or more taps should be provided in connection with the rising main for the supply of water for drinking purposes was not such as they could make under sec. 19 of the Metropolis Water Act, 1871. Bye-Laws re House Drainage. The London County Council forwarded for the observations of the Board a copy of proposed bye-laws with respect to house drainage. The Board were of opinion that several alterations might with advantage be made in such bye-laws, and communicated their views to the London County Council and to the Home Secretary, by whom the proposed byelaws will have to be confirmed. Bye-Laws re Tents, Vans, &c. The Board having submitted to the Local jovernment Board new bye-laws dealing wnn tnis suDject, such Board suggested that a conference should take place between representatives of the Board and officers of the Local Government Board. The suggestion was adopted, but it appeared from the conference that the Board would not be able to obtain the approval of the Local Government Board to all the proposed bye-laws, and as the Board were advised that the bye-laws made by them in 1887 and confirmed by the then Home Secretary were still in force, the application for confirmation of the proposed new bye-laws was not proceeded with. Street Noises. L he Board have again had under consideration tne suDject of the desirability of bye-laws being made for the control or suppression of street cries or noises in the Metropolis. The Board in April, 1894, suggested to the London County Council that they should make bye-laws relative to (a) obstruction of thoroughfares by offering goods for sale ; (b) annoyance 25 by shooting galleries, swing boats, &c. ; (c) occupation of land by squatters, gipsies, &c., and the Council have now asked for the opinion of the Board with regard to bye-laws being made as to (i) street noises ; (2) shooting galleries, roundabouts, &c.; (3) lights to vehicles ; (4) keeping noisy animals. The Board approved of such bye-laws being made and they suggested that the operations of the bye-laws should extend to itinerant musicians, and that those persons should not be allowed to carry on their vocation in the streets after 10 p.m. The Council were also informed that the Board were still of opinion that the matters mentioned in their letter of April, 1894, should be dealt with by bye-laws. A Bill on the subject has been introduced into Parliament and the Board have presented a petition in its favour. Combined Drainage- 1 his subject, which was referred to in the last annual report, continues to receive tne attention of the Vestries and District Boards. The opposition to the Bill of last Session was successful in preventing the second reading being reached, and the London County Council decided to re-introduce the Bill this Session. The provisions of the measure are now under the consideration of the Parliamentary Agent of the Council and of the Committee which was appointed by the Conference of representatives of Vestries and District Boards to deal with the question. Paving and Draining Mews, &c. The suggestion, referred to in the last mnual report, that the London County Council should obtain power to pave and drain these places at the cost of the owners of property abutting thereon without the Local Authority becoming thereby liable for the maintenance and lighting of such places as public highways, has been considered by the Public Health Committee of the London County Council, who reported to the effect that legislation of such a character 26 would have to be by a public bill ; that it was doubtful whether the Council had power to promote such a bill, and they recommended that the Council should call the attention of the Local Government Board to the matter so that it might receive consideration in connection with any proposed changes in the local government of London. This report was approved by the London County Council, and the Board decided to leave the matter in the hands of the London County Council and the Local Government Board. Loans for carrying out Works in New Streets. The Hammersmith Vestry having suggested to the London County Council mat powers snould be obtained for Vestries and District Boards to borrow money for the purpose of carrying out works in new streets, so as to enable them to spread the payment by owners of property of the cost of such works over a period of hot exceeding 20 years, the Parliamentary Committee of the Council stated that in the absence of any generally expressed agreement between local authorities they did not think it desirable to recommend the Council to undertake the promotion of the desired legislation. The Hammersmith Vestry thereupon communicated with the several Vestries and District Boards on the subject. This Board disapproved of the suggestion, as it appeared to them that the effect would be that Local Authorities would provide money to assist owners of land and speculative builders to carry on their operations for the development of estates; and that, moreover, by deferring payment of the charges in question, such persons would be able to escape still more than they do at present the liabilities which fall upon them, as they would pass such liabilities on to the purchasers of new houses, who are frequently not made aware of the charges to which property purchased by them is liable. Although only six of the Local Authorities were in 27 favor of the proposal, whilst seven were against, and ten were either in favor of no action or only acknowledged the receipt of the communication, the Parliamentary Committee decided to recommend the Council to obtain the suggested Parliamentary powers. The Council, however, referred the matter back to the Committee to consider and report whether powers should not be obtained providing for the costs of paving works in new streets being in all cases borne by the freeholders. Subsequently, upon the recommendation of the Committee, the Council decided to take no further steps in the matter. Costermongers. The Board have again had under consideration tne subject of the obstruction caused in the Balham High Road by costermongers, and as the fines which are inflicted in the cases taken by the Board to the police court fail to deter costermongers from assembling in the road, the Board requested the Home Secretary to receive a deputation on the subject. The Home Secretary, however, did not see that any good purpose would be served by receiving the deputation, in view of the decision of the High Court in the case of " Keep v. Vestry of St. Mary, Newington," to the effect that costermongers cannot be interfered with so long as they complied with the police regulations; and he pointed out that the police were always ready to assist Local Authorities in dealing with any specific instance of breach of such regulations, and that they had no legal power to meet complaints respecting costermongers carrying on their trade in the streets where, from a police point of view, no obstruction was caused by their presence. The Home Secretary added that if further powers for regulating the localities where costermongers might be allowed to take their stand, or for removing them from streets where their presence caused annoyance to the inhabitants, were desired, he was of opinion that 28 such powers could only be obtained by legislation. The Board having further considered the matter came to the conclusion that it was desirable that the Local Authorities in London should be empowered to make bye-laws regulating the standing of costermongers in streets, and with the view of steps being taken to obtain such powers communications were addressed to the Vestries and District Boards enquiring whether they concurred in that opinion. As, however, only 15 out of the 40 Authorities written to concurred in the views of the Board, the matter was not further proceeded with. The Board have been urged by tradesmen and other residents, and by the Streatham Vestry, to do all in their power to prevent the obstruction complained of, and as there is a very large and increasing traffic along the road, and the space between the tramway rails and the kerb is very limited, the Board feel that serious danger is likely to arise to the public unless the use of the road by the costermongers be put an end to. They therefore continue to take proceedings against the costermongers at the police court, but as above stated with but little effect at present. Cab Radius. The Hammersmith Vestry invited this lioard to appoint representatives to join a deputation to the Home Secretary in favour of an extension of the cab radius, in accordance with the recommendation of the Departmental Committee of Inquiry, viz.— " That the radius should be that of the Administrative County of " London, minus Plumstead. Drivers should not be compellable, after " a certain hour in the evening, to go any considerable distance except " in the direction of their homes. For this purpose the Metropolitan " area should be divided into districts, and the cabs of each district " distinguished by a lamp of a particular colour." 1 he Board supported the proposal, and Messrs. Howick and Maples were appointed to join the proposed deputation, but the Home Secretary has not yet fixed a date for the purpose. 29 Agricultural Rates Act. This Act came into operation during the year and the Board had some correspondence witn me Local Government Board on the subject, and pointed out that if the Vestries and District Boards were not to be treated as " spending authorities " under the Act, whilst the School Board was included in the definition of that term, the portion of the General Rate levied upon agricultural land which was raised for School Board purposes would be taken into account in determining the amount of the grant from the Treasury, but that there would be no grant in respect of the other portion of the same rate levied upon agricultural land. It appeared to the Board that there was no reason for the distinction, and they suggested that the whole of the General Rate levied upon agricultural land should be taken into account in determining the amount of the grant. The Local Government Board, however, were of opinion that they had no authority to adopt the suggestion. The proposal of the Board, if adopted, would have brought to the District a grant of nearly Aoo per annum. Vaccination Acts. The Board were invited by the St. Pancras Vestry to appoint representatives to attend a conference to discuss the desirability of the administration of the Vaccination Acts being placed in the hands of the Sanitary Authorities instead ot the Poor Law Guardians, and the urgent necessity for the Royal Commission on Vaccination reporting at as early a date as possible. The Board, whilst concurring in the views of the St. Pancras Vestry did not consider it necessary to be represented at the Conference, but informed the Vestry that they were willing to send representatives to attend the proposed deputation, if appointed, to wait upon the President of the Local Government Board, and appointed Mr. Lidiard and Dr. Gay to represent them. The Local Government 30 Board, however, stated that they did not see that any advantage would arise from the attendance of the proposed deputation until the Board had had an opportunity of considering the report of the Royal Commission on the subject. Local Government of the District. The Board being of opinion that the subect of seeking to obtain a Royal Charter of Incorporation or other mode of government for the district was worthy of consideration asked the Vestries of the several Parishes in the District for their views on the subject. The Clapham Vestry was the only Vestry in favor of the proposal, and no further steps have been taken by the Board in the matter. The Vestries of St. Margaret and St. John, Westminster, and Kensington, have presented petitions to the Privy Council for Charters, but such petitions have not yet been dealt with. The Vestry of Wandsworth have had under consideration a proposal for the transfer of that parish from Schedule B to Schedule A of the Metropolis Local Management Act, and addressed communications to the other Vestries in the District, and to this Board and the London County Council, enquiring whether they would support a Bill for the purpose when introduced into Parliament. This Board having considered the matter decided by a majority of 23 to 3 to inform the Vestry that they were not prepared to give their support to the Bill suggested, and gave a similar reply to a letter from the London County Council asking for their opinion on the subject. Proposed Lock and Weir on the Thames. This subject received further attention during the year under report. The Thames (Western) Improvement Committee has been formed on the north side of the river to consider the matter, and they suggested that a half-lock and weir 31 should be constructed below Putney bridge, and asked for the opinion of the Board on the scheme, and for the appointment of one or two members to join the Committee. The Board, however, then declined to take part in the proceedings. Subsequently a Conference was held at Hammersmith, at which a resolution was passed to the effect that it was highly desirable to establish a lock below Putney bridge, and the Board were asked whether they would be prepared to contribute towards the cost of obtaining expert engineering advice in the matter, and to furnish a list of the principal owners of property abutting on the river in this District with the view of obtaining from them contributions towards the preliminary expenses. As it appeared to the Board that the interests of this District might not be identical with those of the authorities on the northern side of the river they decided to be separately advised on the subject, and they have accordingly retained a firm ot civil engineers to report to them thereon with the view of further considering the matter. Beverley Brook. The Main Drainage Committee of the London County Council having recommended that the Beverley Brook at Putney, which is vested in the Council as a sewer by the Metropolis Management Act, 1855, should no longer form part of the main drainage system of the Metropolis, the Council, at the request of the Board, referred the matter back, and a deputation from the Board had an interview with the Committee, and urged them to retain control over the brook, in view * of its value to this district tor the reception of surface water and of the benefit of such control in preventing the drainage of houses into the brook and other nuisances. The representations of the Board having been considered by the Main Drainage Committee the proposal has not been proceeded with. 32 Disturbance of Roads by Water Company. The Kingston Corporation invited the Board to send representatives to a Conference ot local authorities which they had convened to consider the subject of the serious disturbance of roads caused by the frequent openings made by the Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company for the repair of their trunk water main from Hampton to Nunhead, which passes through a portion ot the parish of Streatham. The Board took part in the earlier proceedings of the Conference, but in view of the difference between the provisions of the Metropolis Management Acts and of the Acts in force outside the Metropolis relating to the opening of roads by water companies, to the comparatively small extent to which this Board is affected by the main in question, and to the fact that the Board were not able to join with the other authorities in taking legal proceedings in the matter, the Board were of opinion that it was not expedient to take further part in the Conference. The Board have called the attention of the Company to the great inconvenience to traffic and injury to the roads arising from the frequency with which openings have been made in some roads in Streatham and have requested them to put their main in proper order so as to prevent further cause for complaint. Huguenot Cemetery. The Board have had under consideration a proposal • from the Metropolitan Public Gardens Association that the Board should take over the Huguenot burial ground at East Hill, Wandsworth, and maintain it as a public garden, the Association undertaking to lay it out and provide gates, &c« Several letters were received by the Board from persons interested in the cemetery objecting to the proposal, and after careful consideration of the matter, it was decided to inform the Association that in view of the fact that the large open space of Wandsworth Common was close 33 to the burial ground, and in consideration of the representations contained in the letters above referred to, they objected to the proposal. Proposed Site for Board School, Broomhill Road. The School Board for London again scheduled for the erection of a school the site in Broomhill Road to which reference was made in last year's report. The Board were of opinion that the objections which they urged against the proposal last year still existed, and they therefore requested the Education Department to withhold their consent to the proposed site. They also communicated with the Members of Parliament for the District and with the School Board on the subject, and the proposal has since been abandoned. Proposed Recreation Ground, Putney Bridge Road. The Board have had under consideration a scheme suggested by a meeting of ratepayers of Wandsworth for the purchase of about 20 acres of land in Putney Bridge Road, with a frontage to the river Thames, as a recreation ground. The land in question could be purchased for £31,300, and the Board approved of the scheme, and agreed to contribute £10,000 towards the total cost to be incurred in purchasing and laying out the land, and in maintaining the same as an open space. The London County Council have been asked to take the necessary steps for acquiring such land, and the matter is now under their consideration. Election of Chairman of the Board. At the first Meeting of the Board after the election of Members in June, 1897, Mr. Benjamin Weir, J.P., was unanimously re-elected Chairman for the year. 34 APPORTIONMENTS. The following Apportionments of the estimated cost of paving new roads and constructing a new sewer have been made by the Board during the year, viz.:— Pariah. Date of Apportionment Name of Road. Amount of Apportionment Clapham .... 24th June, 1896 £ s. d. Deauville Road (1st portion) 663 18 0 25th Nov., „ Hambalt Road (2nd portion) 1,152 18 8 9th. Dec., „ Mandalay Road 357 5 6 it 1» 'J Narbonne Avenue (2nd portion) .. 997 1 8 6th Jan., 1897 Nightingale Square 807 5 10 3rd Mar., ,, Nelson's Grove 55 8 9 Perseverance Grove 56 8 9 17th .. Station Road (2nd portion) 224 7 3 Putney 6th Aug., 1896 Salvin Road 395 9 9 Slreatham .. 1st April, 1896 Brandreth Road 427 7 3 n a a Byrne Road (4th portion) 261 6 4 a a a Leigh am C o u 11 Road West (l st portion) 1,394 10 7 »» it it >. .. » (Sewer) .. 273 10 0 27th May, ,, Woodfield Avenue 1,635 16 9 24th June, „ Elmbouine Road (2nd portion).... 879 16 8 30th Sept., ,, Hillbury Road 1,134 4 5 Huron Road (1st portion) 723 13 7 9th Dec., „ Hailsham Avenue (1st portion) .... 469 0 4 6th Jan., 1897 Gaskarth Road 1,091 12 3 Marius Road (1st portion) 442 19 1 Rowfant Road 753 11 6 17th Mar., „ Gleneagle Road (2nd portion) .... 1,038 8 8 »» 11 it Louisville Road 1,713 8 4 a tt tt Valley Road (1st portion) 422 3 5 Ttotiny .... 17th Mar., 1897 Bright well Crescent. 875 6 9 tt tt tt Charlmont Road (2nd portion) .... 646 16 3 tt tt tt Rookstone Road 462 19 2 Wandsuorth 13th May. 1896 Cicada Road (2nd portion) 402 19 7 10th June, „ Quarry Road 394 18 7 8th July, „ Allfa-thing Lane (2nd portion) .... 26 10 0 2nd Sept., „ Jeypore Road 298 14 5 30th ,, „ Aboyne Road (1st portion) 115 16 8 >» tt tt Garratt Lane (3rd portion) 47 10 6 25 th Nov., „ Baskerville Road (2nd portion) .... 434 18 4 9th Dec., „ Upper Richmond Road (2nd portion) 300 14 9 6th Jan., 1897 Fa we Park Road 1,222 15 1 tt tt it Wandsworth Common, West Side (3rd portion) 185 14 10 20th ,, ,, Trinity lload (3rd portion) 112 6 1 17th Feb., „ West Hill (2nd portion) 8,136 6 0 ir. i.. Ti J /r> 1 A • _\ 17th Mar., „ Merton Road (2nd portion) 30 8 2 31,066 8 6 35 No Apportionments of the excess of the actual over the estimated cost of paving new roads have been made by the Board during the year. The following Apportionment of the cost of executing necessary works of repair upon roads not repairable by the Board has been made by the Board during the year under the provisions of section 3 of the Metropolis Management Amendment Act, 1890 (53 & 54 Vic., cap. 66), viz.: — Parish. Date of Apportionment. Name of Road Amount of Apportionment Wandsworth 1st April, 1896 Geddes Road £ £ s. d. 138 12 10 138 12 10 The following Apportionment of the estimated expense of flagging footways, under the provisions of 53 & 54 Vic., cap. 54, has been made by the Board during the year, viz.:— Parish. Date of Apportionment. Name of Road. Amount of Apportionment Wandsworth 8th July. 1896 York Road (1). — Between John Street and No. 417, York Road £ £ s. d. 147 18 9 147 18 9 In addition to the foregoing amounts, the sum of £33 6s. 8d. (two-thirds of the cost of the work) was paid to the Board by the owners of property abutting on the eastern side of Garratt Lane, Wandsworth, between the Waldron Road Board Schools and Burntwood Lane, for tar-paving, &c., the footpath on that side of such portion of Garratt Lane. d 2 36 NEW ROADS. The following applications relating to the formation of new roads in this District have been made to the London County Council during the past year :— Clapham From Dragmire Lane to Thornton Road (Hvdethorpe Road), and the widening of a portion of Dragmire Lane Approved. Between Nightingale Lane and Temperley Road Objected to. Do. do. (Amended plan) Objected to. Putney Between Worple Road and Hotham Vilas Road Objected to. From High Street, Koehampton, to Roehampton Lane, on the Spencer Lodge Estate Objected to. Streatham Between Sternhold Avenue and Bleakhall Lane, Salford Road Approved. On the Manor House Estate:—Broadwater Road, Gatton Road, Khama Road, and Uganda Road, and the widening of a portion of Upper Tooting Road Approved. Manor House Estate, Upper Tooting Road :— Proposed abandonment of the formation of portions of Khama, Broadwater and Gatton Roads Objected to. Pathfield Road (in continuation) Approved. Footway 12 ft. 6 in. wide from Culverden Road to Tooting Bee Common Objected to. Tooting In continuation of Blackshaw Road Objected to. • On the Furzedown Estate, Upper Tooting Road, and the widening of a portion of Upper Tooting Road Objected to. D'tto (Amended plan) :—Letchworth Street, St. Cyprian Street, and Kellino Street, and the widening of a portion of Totterdown and Upper Tooting Road, and a portion of a footway leading to Tooting Common Approved. Wandstvor/h Between Garratt Lane and Lydden Grove— Guelph Street and Lydden Grove (in continuation) Approved. Between East Hill and North Side, Wandsworth Common, Woodwell Road Approved. 37 RE-NAMING STREETS AND RE-NUMBERING HOUSES. The following orders relating to this District have been issued by the London County Council during the past year, viz.;— Parish. Date of Order. Name of Street and Nature of Order. Sireatham 5th May, 1896 Leigham Valley Road and Leigham Lane to be re-named Leigham Vale, and the houses there numbered. 9th February, 1897 Mill Lane to be re-numbered. Tooting 28th July, 1896 Vant Road to be re-numbered. Wandsworth.. 28th July, 1896 Earlsfield Road,—Tennis Court Gardens to be renumbered. 1st December, 1896 . West over Road, to be re-numbered. 15th „ „ Crieff Road, do. do. 9th February, 1897 Killarney Road, do. do. 9th „ East Hill, for re-naming a portion " Huguenot Place." 9th March, 1897 Ditto, for re-numbering the houses on south side of. 38 SEWERS. In the Parish of Clapham, 26 gullies have been constructed, 6 surface ventilator gratings closed, and 6 iron pipe ventilators erected on buiidings instead thereof, and an iron obelisk ventilator has been erected on the footway in Gauden Road. The total cost of the above works was £176 10s. 11d. In addition, £76 7s. has been expended in the repair of gullies and sewers. In new roads, 2,425 feet lineal of new pipe sewer, 11 manholes, 8 surface ventilators, 2 iron pipe ventilators on buildings, and 43 gullies have been constructed at the cost of the owners of adjoining property. In the Parish of Putney, no sewers have been constructed during the past year, but 13 new gullies have been fixed (4 in Salvin Road and 9 in various parts of the parish for the Electric Lighting Company), and 1 manhole has been constructed in Weimar Street Various small works and repairs to sewers and gullies have been executed at a cost of £122 0s. 3d. The gullies, numbering 936, have been regularly cleansed, emptied and disinfected; and all sewers and manholes have been regularly flushed, the quantity of water used being 361,000 gallons. In the Parish of Streatham, 6,098 feet of new sewers, 26 manholes, 28 ventilators, 6 lamp holes, and 119 gullies, with about 2,212 feet of 6-inch pipe drain thereto, have been constructed during the year, all under the supervision of the officers of the Board. In Alderbrook Road, Cloudesdale Road, Westwell Road, and Zennor Road, galvanized iron ventilating shafts have been erected against the sides of houses in lieu of the existing ventilators in the middle of the road, which in all cases have been entirely done away with or closed. The London County 39 Council have now completed the Wandle branch sewer, which extends as far as Norbury Bridge, Lower Streatham. The old sewers in Martindale Road, Kenilford Road, and Lammermoor Road having been found defective, the whole of them have been re-constructed. The work was done by contract at a cost of £380 4s. 10d. All the sewers, gullies, manholes. &c., have been cleansed, flushed and disinfected, and, where necessary, altered and repaired, at a cost of £653 8s. 5d. for cleansing, and £399 3s. 10d. for repairs. A new convenience has been erected at Balham Station, under the railway bridge. The foundations, brickwork. &c., were carried out by the L. B. & S. C. Railway Company at a cost of £206 15s. 10d., and the sanitary internal fittings by Messrs. H. Doulton & Co., at a contract price of £87. The convenience which was taken down at Streatham Hill, nearly opposite the station, has been re-erected at Pendennis Road. Arrangements have been made with the L. 13. & S. C. Railway Company for a convenience to be erected at Leigham Court Road West, but the work has not yet been carried out. The sum of £174 18s. 4d. has been expended in the maintenance of the public urinals at Balham Station, Bedford Hill, Streatham Hill, Pendennis Road, and the underground convenience near Streatham Church. The pence collected at the underground convenience during the year amounted to £11 11s. 6d. In the Parish of Tooting, 4,250 feet of new sewers, 14 manholes, 15 ventilators, 4 lamp holes, and 37 gullies with about 488 feet of 6-in. pipe drain thereto, have been constructed during the year, and sewer junctions have been provided for 18 gullies not yet constructed, all under the supervision of the officers of the Board. In connection with the laying out of the Furzedown estate, the old lane named Totterdown has been widened to 40 feet, and a 40 new sewer constructed there. In order to provide for the drainage of the land lying to the east of the estate, it was considered desirable to construct a 3—ft. by 2—ft. brick sewer in lieu of the 18-inch pipe as proposed. The Board agreed to pay the difference in the cost amounting to £68. All the sewers, gullies, manholes, &c., have been cleansed, flushed, and disinfected, and, where necessary, altered and repaired at a cost of £104 12s. for cleansing, and £105 13s. 7d. for repairs, In the Parish of "Wandsworth, 230 feet of 15-inch and 1,443 feet of 12-inch pipe sewers, with 9 manholes and 33 gullies, have been constructed in new roads by and at the expense of the owners. In private roads, 35 gullies have been constructed, and 10 manholes brought up to the surface, and iron covers with dirt boxes provided in connection therewith, at the expense of the owners In public roads, 250 feet of 12-inch and 607 feet of 9-inch pipe sewers, 11 manholes, and 49 gullies, have been constructed, and 29 manholes have been brought up to the surface, and iron covers with dirt boxes provided in connection therewith, by and at the expense of the Board, in various parts of the parish; 24 sewer ventilators in roadways have been sealed, and 22 6-inch by 4-inch iron ventilating pipes fixed against buildings, and 2 column ventilators (30 feet in height) erected in lieu of same at a cost of £186 14s. 5d. The whole of the work in connection with the abovementioned sewers was executed by the Board's workmen. The gullies have been regularly emptied and periodically flushed and disinfected, and the sewers cleansed and flushed where necessary. The expenditure in connection with the urinals amounted to £64 0s. 2d., and the pence received at the underground convenience at East Hill amounted to £18 6s. 7d. 41 PARTICULARS OF NEW SEWERS. PARISHES. LOCALITIES Lengths and Sizes.— Feet Lineal. 3ft x 2ft Brick Sewer 18-in. Pipe Sewer 15-in. Pipe Sewer 12-in. Pipe Sewer 9-in. Pipe Sewer Pipe Sewer Clapham Hydethorpe Road .. .. 1809 410 .. .. Venn Street passage .. .. .. .. 206 .. Streatham Croxted Road .. .. 670 .. .. .. Hawarden Grove .. .. .. 628 .. .. Kenilford Road .. 8 .. 330 .. .. Lammermoor Road .. .. .. 376 .. .. Martindale Road .. 8 .. 330 .. .. Veronica Road .. .. .. 688 .. .. Terrapin Road .. .. .. 430 .. .. Leigham Court Road West .. .. .. 800 .. .. Cavendish Road .. .. 24 .. .. .. Culverden Road .. .. 430 .. 10 .. Palace Road .. .. .. .. 10 .. Christchurch Road. .. .. .. 8 .. .. John Street .. .. 400 .. .. .. Gatton Road .. .. .. 480 .. .. Nevis Road .. .. .. 468 .. .. Tooting Kellino Street .. .. 428 .. .. .. Letcb worth Street .. .. 560 .. .. .. St. Cyprian Street .. .. .. 346 .. .. Totterdown 206 .. .. .. .. .. Coverton Road .. .. .. 1130 .. .. Gilbey Road .. .. .. 1074 .. .. Gambole Road .. .. 506 .. .. .. Wandsworth Burnt wood Lane (ditch) .. .. .. .. 524 .. Guelph Street .. .. 230 620 .. .. Lydden Grove .. .. .. 823 .. .. Point Pleasant .. .. .. .. 46 .. Victoria Road .. .. .. .. .. 206 Waterside .. .. .. .. 83 .. Merton Road (ditch) .. .. .. 250 .. .. Totals 206 16 5,057 9,191 879 205 42 PRIVATE DRAINS. The following are the particulars of the private drains which have been constructed by the Board during the past year, the cost of which has been paid by the persons for whom the work was executed : — PARISHES. No. of Drains. No. of Houses, &c., drained thereby. Lengths and sizes—feet lineal. lengths, — feet lineal. 18-in. 15-in. 12-in. 9-in. 6-in. 4-in. Clapham 176 305 .. .. .. 36 3654 308 3998 Putney 90 114 .. .. .. 20 1715 .. 1735 Streatham 249 564 14 278 222 238 5032 30 5814 Tooting 31 90 .. 10 80 34 748 .. 872 Wandsworth 172 278 .. .. .. 198 3542 44 3784 Totals 718 1,351 14 288 302 526 14,691 382 16,203 In the Parish of Clapham, this work has been executed by the Board without the aid of a contractor. In the Parish of Putney, in addition to the above, 925 feet of 6-in. pipe drain3 have been laid by the contractors building in new roads. In the Parish of Streatham, in addition to the above, 58 drains, comprising 1,072 feet of 6-inch and 164 feet of 9-inch pipe have been laid under new roads at the time of and in conjunction with the construction of new sewers; these are intended to drain 128 houses when built. Thus an aggregate of about 1⅓ miles of drains has been laid under public roads and paths in this parish for various purposes during the year. About 2,655 feet of 9-inch drain, comprised in a system of combined drainage, have been constructed on the Leigham Court estate under the supervision of the Board's officers. In the Parish of Tooting, 14 drains, comprising about 160 feet of 6-inch and 120 feet of 9-inch pipes, have been laid under new roads at the time of and in conjunction with the construction of new sewers; these 43 are intended to drain 116 houses when built. Thus an aggregate of about a quarter of a mile of drains has been laid under public roads and paths during the year. In the Parish of Wandsworth, the whole of the foregoing work has been executed by the Board without the intervention of a contractor. In addition to the above, 2,720 feet of 6-inch and 80 feet of 9-inch pipe drains have been laid under new roads by the owners at the time of and in conjunction with the construction of new sewers; these are intended to drain about 140 houses when built. HIGHWAYS. The following are the particulars of the quantities of the materials used in the repairs of the roads and footpaths within the District during the past year, viz:— MATERIALS. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. cube yards. Guernsey Granite 931 1,163 2,043 451 2,501 7,089 „ „ Chippings 321 .. 250 65 .. 636 „ „ Sittings 49 .. .. .. .. 49 Enderby Granite .. .. 206 .. .. 206 „ „ Chippings .. .. 18 .. .. 18 Hartshill Granite .. .. 72 .. .. 72 „ „ Chippings .. .. 12 .. .. 12 Griff Granite .. .. 79 79½ „ „ Chippings .. .. 12 .. .. 12 Bardon Hill Granite .. .. 71 .. .. 71 „ „ Chippings .. .. 11 .. .. 11 Cornish Stone 916 1,348 .. .. 741 3,005 ,, ,, Sittings .. 42 .. .. .. 42 Kentish Pit Flints 2,341 1,827 319 141 2,820 7,448 Coarse Gravel 329 .. 5,764 687 .. 6,780 37 745 605½ 13 266 1,666½ Ballast .. 822 .. .. 620 1,442 Hard Core .. 42 1,119 12 1,803 2,976 Ashes .. .. .. .. 56 56 Old Macadam .. .. 10 .. .. 10 Sea Shell 90 •• •• •• •• 90 Totals 5,014 5,989 10,592 1,369 8,807 31,771 44 In the Parish of Putney, in addition to the foregoing, 88| yards of pea gravel were used on slippery roads. The total length of road repaired by the Board is now 130J miles, showing an increase of about 3J miles during the year. The following are the lengths in each parish:— PARISH. M. F. Y. Clapham 28 3 150 Putney 22 0. 196 Streatham 40 3 75 Tooting 6 0 107 Wandsworth 33 3 123 Total 130 3 211 The above table does not include the following lengths of public ways which are used as footpaths only, viz.:— Clapham, 2 miles 7 furlongs; Putney, 1 mile 6 furlongs 70 yards; Streatham,4 miles 3 furlongs 110 yards; Tooting, 345 yards; Wandsworth, 1 mile 4 furlongs, 196 yards; total, 10 miles 7 furlongs 61 yards. In the Parish of Wandsworth, the total length of private roads is 15 miles 4 furlongs 164 yards. 45 PAVING WORKS, IMPROVEMENTS, &c. PARISH OF CLAPHAM. Paving New St. Alplionsus Road, and the portion of streets. Deauville Road between Elms Road and Shandon Road, have been paved and adopted by the Board. The total estimated cost paid by the owners of adjoining property was £1,576 5s. 6d. The paving of Venn Street, on the Rectory estate, has been further proceeded with, but is not yet completed, Bromell's Buildings, Hume Place, and Vine Cottages on that estate having been closed and the buildings pulled down. The work executed included 3,957 feet super. 2½ inch York paving; 2,070 yards super, tar-paving; 425 yards super. 5-inch by 6-inch granite channelling laid on 6 inches of concrete; and 2,590 feet lineal 12-inch by 8-inch granite kerb; the roads were made up with 350 cubic yards hard core, 470 cubic yards stone gravel, 725 cubic yards flints, and 70 cubic yards hoggin, and consolidated by rolling with the steam roller. steam Roller. The steam roller has worked 235 days during the year; 190 of which were on parish roads and 45 on new roads. The cost of working was as follows : £ s. d. Wages (including watching and cleansing) 145 8 2 Coke (78 chaldrons) 35 15 0 Oil, waste and firewood 8 9 10 Repairs (including new driving wheels) 66 4 6 Insurance 2 10 4 Total cost of 235 days working £258 7 10 46 Daily Cost. £ s. #] Wages 0 12 4¾ Coke 0 3 0½ Oil, waste, and firewood 0 0 8½ Repairs 0 5 7½ Insurance 0 0 2½ £1 1 11¾ Paving works. The following new paving works have been executed during the year, viz.:— £ s. d. High Street,—Opposite new shops Nos. 34 to 42a inclusive,—141 feet by 8-feet 6-inches has been added to the footpath (1,200 feet super. York paving) 60 0 0 Rectory Estate,—Wirtemberg Street (260 feet lineal 12-inch by 8-inch granite kerb) 27 12 10 Howard Street,—granite channelling laid on concrete (13 yards super.) 5 4 0 Station Road,—tar-paving (33 yards super) 3 13 1 Lyham Road at Chale Road,—17 feet by 12 feet has been added to the footpath (23 yards super. tar-paving) 2 6 0 £98 15 11 The following sums have been expended in paving repairs, viz:— £ s. d. For granite and York paving 93 9 0 For asphalte paving 352 12 2 For tar-paving 100 9 2 For tar-paving,—dressing with tar and grit, 44,250 yards super 230 9 4 For wood-paving in Clapham Park Road originally paved in 1886, re-laid with softwood 5-inch blocks grouted with tar and pitch, 1,340 yards super. at 6s. 8d. £446 13 4 Carried forward £446 13 4 776 19 8 47 £ s. d. £ s. d. Brought forward 446 13 4 776 19 8 Re-laid with old blocks, cleaned and grouted with cement, 460 yards super. at 3s. 3d. 74 15 0 521 8 4 For wood paving repairs of other pavements 126 12 8 £1,425 0 8 48 £ s. d. Brought forward 936 3 5 Wages, horse-keeper, and stable helpers 217 4 0 Harness, additions and repairs 53 5 9 Tools, fuel, oil, &c. 18 11 3 Repairs and painting to stables 104 2 1 Rates, insurance, gas, and water 71 0 0 Interest on capital and depreciation,— buildings, 5 per cent. on £2,500 125 0 0 Do. do. gas engine and fittings, 10 per cent. on £-360 36 0 0 Do. do. 20 horses, 10 per cent on £1,220 122 0 0 Do. do. 5 horses purchased during the year, 10 per cent. on £300 30 0 0 £1,713 6 6 The number of days' work performed as against this amount (£1,713 6s. 6d.) was 6,973, or about 4s. l1d. for each day's work per horse. 49 PARISH OF PUTNEY. During the past year the following improvements have been effected, viz.:— Putney Bridge Road. On the south side of Putney Bridge Road, between Oxford Road and No. 5, Cedars Cottages, near College Street, a strip of land, about 271 feet in length and of an average width of 9 feet, has been acquired by the Board and thrown into the public thoroughfare at a cost of £383 18s. 4d. The vacant land on the north side of Putney Bridge Road, between Deodar Road and Crest House, a distance of about 130 feet, having been built upon, the forecourt line has been kept back about 6 feet at the widest point; the re-formation of the footpath and roadway is now in course of execution. Paving and Repairing New Streets. The following new roads have been paved and adopted during the past year, viz.:— Dryburgh Road and Salvin Road, a total length of about two furlongs, at a total estimated cost of £l,224 1s. l0d. The work executed included 1,958 yards super. patent Victoria paving; 2,643 feet run 12-inch by 8-inch granite kerb; 100 tons 9-inch by 5-inch by 4-inch Tees Scoriae setts; 7 tons 5-inch by 7-inch granite setts; 1,020 4½-inch by 4½-inch blue Staffordshire bricks; 14¾ tons lias lime; 14/5 tons Portland cement; 605½ yards cube Kentish flints; 47 yards cube hoggin; l60 yards cube Thames ballast; and 132 yards cube hard core. In addition to the foregoing, the following new roads have been repaired by the Board, under the provisions of sec. 3 of the Metropolis Management Amendment Act, 1890 (53 & 54 Vic., cap. 66) viz.:—Kersfield Road and Balmuir Gardens, a total length of about 2 furlongs 173 yards. wharf. During the past year, additional stabling has been provided at the parish wharf by setting apart and enclosing a portion of the open cart shed, which has been E 50 paved, drained, and fitted for four horses at a total cost of £79 8s. lOd. Other small works and general repairs have also been executed at a cost of £5 6s. 9d. Paving works. The cost of the various paving works carried out during the past year is as follows, viz.:— £ s. #] New 2-inch Victoria paving, new blue bricks carriage crossing, and relaying kerb and channel, on east side of Putney Hill, from "The Elms" to " Wynnstay " 221 12 2 Paving Spring Gardens Lane throughout with old York paving 20 16 9 Relaying kerb, channel and crossing at Nubia Terrace, Lower Richmond Road 10 12 1 Laying new Scoriæ setts as channel in Roehampton Lane, from Manresa House entrance to opposite "Spencer Arms" on the south side, and from "Spencer Arms" to Ponsonby Road on the north side 30 12 1 Relaying kerb and channel and laying new 2-inch Adamant stone to footpath at Gordon Terrace, Upper Richmond Road 74 0 6 Relaying kerb and laying new 2-inch Adamant stone to footpath on north side of Upper Richmond Road, between High Street and Wandsworth parish boundary 329 13 8 Laying old kerb on Kingston Road through cutting on Jerry's Hill 77 18 4 Relaying channel on both sides of Montserrat Road, between High Street and Burstock Road 11 12 1 Relaying channel on west side of Putney Hill, from Upper Richmond Road to St. John's Road 9 10 8 Laying old kerb in Roehampton Lane, from the Convent to Convent farm entrance 57 19 1 Relaying kerb on north side of Worple Road, between March's Place and Roskell Road 4 14 9 Private works, gas and water trenches, and various small works and repairs 472 12 6 £1,321 14 8 51 The quantity of material used in the above works was as follows, viz.:— 1,365 yards super. 2-inch patent Adamant stone; 715 yards super. patent Victoria stone; 774½ yards super. asphalte; 303 yards super. 2½ inch Silex brand York paving; 5541 yards super. tar-paving; 546 feet run new 12-inch by 8-inch granite kerb; 1,930 feet super. old 12-inch by 8-inch kerb; 14,500 4½-inch by 4½-inch blue Staffordshire bricks; 3,000 wood blocks; 55 tons lias lime; and 10 tons Portland cement. Trenches. The cost of repairs to gas, water and electric light trenches, paid for by the several Companies, has been £339 15s. 3d. Electric light Mains. The County of London and Brush Provincial Electric Lighting Company, Limited, have now laid electric light mains in the following streets in the parish, viz.:— High Street, Putney Hill, on the north-west side of Putney Heath from the top of Putney Hill to High Street, Roehampton, Upper Bichmond Boad from Wandsworth parish boundary to the "Northumberland Arms," Chartfield Road, portion of Carlton Road, Treville Street, Roehampton, Medfield Street, High Street, Roehampton, Ponsonby Road, Roehampton Lane from the corner of High Street to Ponsonby Road, and a portion of Alton Road from Roehampton Lane to Bessborough Road,— a total length of nearly 3½ miles. Hoardings. The sum of £6 5s. has been received for hoarding licences, and £42 l1s. for re-instating pavements after the removal of the hoardings. stables. During the past year, 4 additional horses have been purchased, 3 from Mr. Jackman for the sum of £189 and one from Mr. Robert Aviss for the sum of £30, and one has been sold to Mr. Jackman for the sum of £32 10s., making the total number now kept by the Board E 2 52 in this parish 15. The following are the particulars of the cost of maintenance of the stable establishment for the year, showing the keep of horses, including labour and expenses of every description, viz.:— £ s. d. Provender 490 13 10 Shoeing 46 17 0 Veterinary fee for examination of and attendance upon horses 17 6 6 Wages of horse-keeper, &c. 83 6 1 Hire of harness 31 11 1 Loin cloths and nose bags 5 11 0 Various utensils and sundries 12 8 4 One quarter of rates 13 12 1 Fire insurance 114 Gas 602 Water 104 Interest on capital and depreciation,—buildings, (£811 4s. 10d. at 5 per cent.) 40 11 3 Ditto, 15 horses (£942 5s. at 10 per cent.) 94 4 6 Ditto, trace harness (£26 10s. 8d. at 10 per cent.) 2 13 1 Ditto, gas engine, &c. (£130 16s. at 10 per cent.) 13 1 7 Ditto, various stable utensils, (£20 14s. 10d. at 10 per cent.) 2 16 £861 19 8 £ s. d. Cr. Cash received for manure 30 0 11 „ „ roan gelding 32 10 0 62 10 11 £799 8 9 The average number of horses kept throughout the year equals 14.05. The cost per horse for keep and maintenance was therefore £56 18s., or 3s. l½d. per day. The charge, however, to the various jobs on which the horses have worked should be 3s. 9d., which sum will cover the expenses of keep during Sundays, and the time 53 horses have been in stable during sickness. This shows a decrease of 5d. per horse per day on the working expenses upon that of the previous year. The illness during the past year has been 5.58 per cent., being 2.14 per cent. more than that of last year. steam Roller. The steam roller has been worked 210 days, 33 of which were for new roads, and 35 for private works, the accounts for which have been paid. The cost of working the roller during the past year was as follows, viz.: — £ s. d. Wages (including cleaning) 109 5 7 Coke and wood 24 7 0 Oil and waste 11 14 0 Repairs 2 10 2 Insurance 2 10 4 Depreciation, 5 per cent. on first cost 18 10 0 Total cost of working 210 days £168 17 1 *44??? per cent, has been written off for depreciation. Daily Cost. £ s. #] Wages (including watching and cleaning) 0 10 5 Coke 0 2 4 Oil and waste 0 1 1 Repairs 0 0 3 Insurance 0 0 3 Depreciation 0 1 9 £0 16 1 54 PARISH OF STREATHAM. streatham Hill. By arrangement with the London County Council, the bridge carrying this road over the railway is being widened at the joint expense of the Council and the Board. The former have agreed to contribute the sum of £115 towards the cost. Tramways. The improvements in connection with the cable tramways extension along Streatham Hill and Streatham High Road have now been completed, and the footways paved. Upper Tooting Road. In connection with the laying out of the Furzedown and Manor House estates. arrangements have been made for increasing the width of the road to 60 feet. Leigham Court Road West. By arrangement with the L.B. & S.C. Railwav Companv and Drew's Trustees, this road has been widened to an uniform width of 40 feet. The cost of setting back the fence amounted to £32. Balham & Streatham High Roads. Artificial stone paving has been laid in front of shops, &c. in various parts of these roads instead of the old tar-paving being repaired. The cost of this work amounted to £489 12s. Id. crossings. Three new paved crossings have been laid in Mitcham Lane and Eardley Road, the cost of which, including paved channels to the nearest gullies, has been £41 8s. offices. The exterior of the parish offices has been repaired and painted, and the interior of the Committee Room papered and decorated, at a cost of £75 5s. Parish Depots. Two plots of land are being purchased for parish purposes,—one containing an area of about 3¼ 55 acres, situate at Blackshaw Road, Fountain Road, and Alstone Road, Tooting,-from Mr. lies, for the sum of £2,112 10s.; and the other (including the stabling there) containing an area of 1 acre 1 rood and 20 poles, situate at Besley Street, from Mr. Gr. Neal, for the sum of £2,500. Trenches. The charges for re-instating trenches made for gas, water, telegraph, electric light, and other purposes during the year amounted to £l,087 12s. 5d. Paving works. Repairs have been effected to the paving, kerbing, crossings, channels, wood-paving, and tarpaving in various parts of the parish, at a cost of £2,875 lis. 4d. The materials used in the above works were: 1,728 yards of Adamant paving, 390 yards of new Victoria paving, 12,627 yards of tar-paving, 25,186 yards of re-topping, 14,733 yards of running and shelling, 969 feet of new granite kerb, 483 yards of paved crossings and channels, 2,220 blue bricks, 12,000 wood blocks, 157 yards of sand, 85 yards of ballast, 44 tons of cement, 5 tons of lime, 64 yards of hard core, and 465 yards of gravel. About 97,938 feet of old stone and brick paving, stone pitching, and wood-paving have been taken up and re-laid. Paving New Streets. The following new roads have been paved and adopted during the year, viz.: Leig- ham Court Road West (first portion), Hereward Road, Brandreth Road, Pathfield Road (first portion), Ormeley Road (second portion), Byrne Road (fourth portion), Elmbourne Road (first portion), Woodfield Avenue, L???itwood Road (second portion), Streatham Station Approach Road (first portion), Hailsham Avenue (first portion), and Huron Road (first portion); total length, 56 1 mile, 7 furlongs, 120 yards. The estimated cost of making up and paving these new roads under the annual contracts of the Board amounted to £9,490 11s.; and the materials, &c. used in the works included 63 new gullies, 5,063 yards of hard core, 4,694 yards of stone gravel, 19,960 feet of new kerb, 3,521 super. yards of channel and crossings, 13,314 yards of tar-paving, and 13,314 yards of running and shelling. The cost of working the rollers during this period has been as follows, viz.— £ s. #] "Wages of drivers and flag boys (including watching and cleaning) 283 12 2 Coke 77 6 3 Oil, waste, white lead, and sundries 25 7 0 Repairs 91 6 0 Insurance 5 0 8 Depreciation at 10 per cent. per annum on 2nd roller 33 17 10 £516 9 11 steam Boilers. The Board's steam rollers have been worked on 449 days, made up as follows, viz.:— Public Roads. New Roads. . Streatham 242½ 189½ 432 Tooting 17 — 17 449 Daily Cost. £ s. #] Wages (including watching and cleaning) 0 12 7½ Coke 0 3 5½ Oil, waste, and sundries 0 1 1½ Repairs 0 4 0¾ Insurance 0 0 2½ Depreciation 0 1 6 £1 2 11¾ 57 The above cost does not include the sum of £155 balance of cost of the second roller, nor the sum of £35 6s. 3d. the difference in cost between 40s. and 25s. per day allowed to Tooting Parish. No. 1 roller having been thoroughly overhauled and the boiler re-tubed during the year, it has not been considered necessary to provide for depreciation this year on this roller. Twenty per cent. has now been written off for depreciation on each roller. Other steam rollers have been hired during the year and used on public roads for 84 days, at a cost of £118 17s. 6d., and on new roads for 40¾ days, at a cost of £12 15s. PARISH OF TOOTING. Merton Road. In connection with the laying out of the Limes estate, arrangements have been made for increasing the width of Merton Road to 60 feet. Trenches. The charges for re-instating trenches made for gas, water, and other purposes during the year amounted to £53 15s. 9d. Paving works. Repairs have been effected to the paving, kerbing, crossings, channels, wood-paving, and tar-paving in various parts of the parish at a cost of £66 5s. Id. The materials used in the above works were 12½ yards of pitching and crossings, 686 yards of tar-paving, 501 yards of re-topping, 162 feet of new York paving. About 2,160 feet of old stone, brick paving, wood paving, &c., have been taken up and relaid. steam Rollers. Steam rollers have been hired during the year for 54¾ days on public roads at a cost of £92 9s. 9d. 59 PARISH OF WANDSWORTH. Paving New Streets. During the past year the following roads have been adopted by the Board, and the cost of paving them paid by the owners of the property abutting thereon, viz.:— Name of Road. Length in yards. Barmouth Road 326 Cicada Road (2nd portion) 173 Jeypore Road 131 Killarney Rcod 145 Quarry Road 162 Swanage Road 205 Trefoil Road 182 Vanderbilt Road 238 (7 fur. 22 yds) 1,562 Footpaths only. Allfarthing Lane, from St. Ann's Park Road to No. 5 Barmouth Road Merton Road (on east side between Brathway Road and Camborne Road,— 1st portion) West Hill, north side between Upper Richmond Road and Amerland Road York Road, from John Street to No. 417, York Road The materials used in the above works included 409 cubic yards of hard core, 1,887 cubic yards of flints, 1,108 cubic yards of Thames ballast, 180 tons 4-inch by 6-inch, and 1 ton of 4-inch by 4-inch granite setts, 319 tons of scoriae brick channelling, 7,806 super, yards of tar-paving, 5,638 super, yards of tarring and sanding, 582 lineal feet of 12-inch by 8-inch, and 219 lineal feet of 12-inch by 6-inch kerbing, 261 super. yards of 2½-inch York paving, and 75½ super. yards of blue panel brick 60 paving for crossings. The materials used in repairing roads under the provisions of section 3 of the Metropolis Management Amendment Act, 1890 (53 and 54 Yic. cap. 66), were: 226 cubic yards hard core, 47 cubic yards ballast, and 191½ cubic yards flints. Repairs. The following paving materials have been used in public roads during the year, viz.:— Granite sett channelling 77-tons., 2-cwt. Scoriae brick do. 14 „ Granite kerbing 2,684 lineal feet. Tar-paving 3,1641/3 super. yards. Coating existing tar-paving with tar and grit 22,552½ Topping 5182/3 ,, York paving 968½ ,, The following are the principal improvements and paving works carried out during the year, viz.;— Allfarthing Lane. By agreement with the owner, a triangular piece of ground, having a frontage of 26 feet to Barmouth Road, was given up to the Board, and a desirable improvement has been made at the junction of these two roads at a cost of £58 7s. 3d This amount includes the cost of channelling from Barmouth Road to 'Maisonette.' Burntwood Lane. The ditches on the north side between Garratt Farm and Burntwood Lodge, and on the south side between Beecheroft Road and Trinity Road, have been piped where required, filled up, and gullies constructed where necessary, and the land gained thereby added to the public footway. The total cost of the work, including gravelling the paths, was £163 Is. 5d. Bridgend Road. The kerbing on the east side, between York Road and Wandsworth Bridge, has been taken up, jointed, and relaid on concrete, and the footpath tarpaved, at a cost of £50 17s. 6d. 61 EastHiii. The Tramways Company have extended their double line of rails from Birdhurst Road to Alma Boad, and have remcved the macadam and paved the whole of the carriage-way with wood blocks. In connection with this work the old kerbing on the south side of the road was taken up, jointed, and relaid on concrete, new kerbing being provided where necessary, and the old tar-paving removed and York paving substituted therefor, at a cost of £87 19s. 8d.; the Tramways Company contributed £25 towards this amount. The approach to the footpath on the east side of the Huguenot Cemetery leading from East Hill to Huguenot Place has been improved by the removal of the step and the lowering of the footpath. The cost of this work, including the re-topping of the tar-paving, was £8 15s. 7d. Garratt Lane Owing to the narrowness of the road (the minimum width being only 25 feet 6 inches including path), and the awkward angle at Dunt's Hill, several accidents have occurred there, and it is proposed to make the roadway 50 feet in width. The Board are acquiring the freehold premises on the south side known as Nos. 1, 2 and 3, Dunt's Hill, the forecourts of Nos. 5 and 6, Keatch's Cottages, and a strip of the intervening plot of land for the sum of £1,500. A portion of the land required on the north side has also been secured for the sum of £200, and negotiations are in progress for acquiring the remaining portion of land required on the north side. The estimated cost of the improvement, including the land and York Paving for footpaths, is £2,963 17s. 6d., and the London County Council have agreed to contribute a sum of not exceeding £742 15s. High street. The carriage entrances in front of the Town Hall have been abolished and the whole of the old paving taken up and relaid, the cost, including the necessary new York paving, being £42 18s. 11d. 62 North Side Wandsworth Common. By arrangement with the London County Council, a strip of the Common varying from 2 feet 9 inches to 5 feet 9 inches in width was given up to the Board for widening the road between West Side and St. Ann's Road. A footpath has been formed, kerbed, and tar-paved, the carriageway widened, and channelling laid between West Side and Spencer Park, at a cost of £318 lis. 4d. Trinity Road. The railway bridge has been widened from its former width of 20 feet 8 inches to 40 feet by the L. & S.W. Railway Company under an agreement with the London County Council. The estimated cost is £3,485 5s. 4d.; two-thirds of the cost is to be paid by the Council and one-third by the Board. The carriageway between the railway bridge and the Surrey Tavein has been scarified and a foundation of hard core and flints constructed, at a cost of £555, or 1s. 0¾d. per super. yard. Two granite sett crossings have been laid, one opposite Bellevue Road and the other opposite Dorlcote Road, at a cost of £34 18s. 11d. The footpath on the west side abutting on the common, between No, 261 and Burntwood Lane, has been tar-paved for a width of 7 feet and circular kerb laid at the corner of Burntwood Lane, at a cost of £97 4s. 3d. Upper Richmond Road. The kerbing on the north side, between Schubert Road and Oakhill Road, has been taken up, jointed, and relaid on concrete, the tar-paving removed and York paving laid in lieu thereof at a cost of £526 1s. The carriageway between Galveston Road and No. 9, Upper Richmond Road was scarified and a foundation of hard core and flints constructed at a cost of £73 4s. Id., or Is. 2d. per super, yard. Wandsworth Common, West Side. The London County Council having agreed to give up sufficient land on the east side to widen the roadway to 50 feet between Hugue- 63 not Place and Trefoil Road, and also to round off the abrupt corners at North Side and St. Ann's Road, the footpath abutting on the Common was kerbed and tarpaved and channelling laid at a cost of £277 12s. 4d. Wimbledon Park Road. The triangular piece of ground at the corner of West Hill Road has been enclosed by an unclimbable iron fencing, and the footpath across the same tar-paved, at a cost of £76 12s. 1d. Feathers wharf. By the payment of £28 to the Thames Conservancy a portion of the River Thames foreshore (about 24 feet in width) has been reclaimed and added to the wharf. A concrete wall has been constructed abutting on the river and having a frontage of 35(5 feet thereto. The wall, which has a batter of 1½ inches to a foot, is 22 feet 3 inches in height with a width of 7 feet 8 inches at its base and 1 foot 9 inches at the top. The concrete was mixed in the proportion of six parts of Thames ballast to one part of Portland cement. The whole of the work was done without the intervention of a contractor at a cost of £2,095 Is. 9d., or £5 17s. 8d. per foot frontage. The canal adjoining the wharf has been deepened, as agreed with Messrs. McMurray, at a cost of £28 8s. 5d. Southfields Slop Shoot. The Board have now secured the intervening plots of land referred to in last year's report. The total area of freehold land purchased is 20 acres 3 roods 7 poles, and the total cost is £5,654, or an average of £271 18s. 2d. per acre. In addition to the above amount, a sum of £110 13s. 11d. has been expended in the construction of a temporary bridge and approaches thereto, and £242 8s. 10d. for the redemption of tithes. The part of the land which is not at present used for a shoot is let for grazing purposes at £22 per annum. Previous to acquiring this land, the Board paid 9d. per load for private 64 shoots. The total number of loads collected last year was 18,706. At 9d. per load this would cost £701 9s. 6d. If the the slop had to be taken away by barge the cost would have been about 2s. per load, or £1,870 12s. The purchase money has been raised by loan, repayable in 54 years by equal annual instalments of capital, the interest on the balance being at the rate of 3¼ per cent, per annum. The highest amount payable in one year (the first) for capital and interest is £287 11s. 3d. and the average annual amount spread over the whole period is £196 3s. 8d. It will thus be seen that a considerable saving to the parish has been effected. The Board have under consideration the question of laying out a portion of the land in allotments; and when the whole of the area has been filled up with slop it is proposed to lay it out as a recreation ground. Trenches. The following statement shows the superficial area of pavements disturbed by the gas, water, and electric lighting companies, and others, for the laying and repair of their mains and services, viz.:— Kerbing (relaid) 110 lineal feet. Do. (new) 28½ ,, York paving (relaid) 1,085½ superficial yards. Do. (new) 47½ ,, Victoria stone paving (relaid) 1½ ,, Do. do. (new) ½ ,, Tar-paving 1,763½ ,, Blue paving bricks (new) 1 ,, Wood-paving (relaid) l½ ,, Do. (new) ½ ,, Granite setts (relaid) 231 ,, Granite macadam 919 ,, Flints and gravel 4,357 ,, The total amount received during the year for repairing trenches was £1,756 7s. 10d. 65 steam Hollers. The steam rollers have been worked 500 days, 89 of which were for new roads, 56 for improvements, 334 for repairing roads, and 21 for private works. The cost of working the rollers during the past year was as follows, viz.:— £ s. d. Wages (including watching and cleaning) 300 8 1 Coke and firewood 59 2 1 Oil, waste, &c. 17 15 6 Repairs 26 7 7 Insurance 4 15 5 *Depreciation (10 per cent, on first cost) No. 1 33 16 0 No. 2 33 10 0 Total cost £475 14 8 *40 per cent, has now leen written off for depreciation on Roller No. 1, and 20 per cent, on Boiler No. 2. Average Daily Cost of each Roller. £ s. d. Wages 0 12 0½ Coke and firewood 0 2 4½ Oil, waste, &c 0 0 8½ Repairs 0 1 0½ Insurance 0 0 2¼ Depreciation 0 2 8¼ £0 19 0½ Water (estimated) 0 0 4 Total daily cost £0 19 4½ A 10-ton steam roller has been hired and used for 34½ days in repairing public roads, at a cost of £51 15s. F 66 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING. In the Parish of Clapham, the number of loads of dust removed during the year was 6,977 van loads and 2,010 cart loads. The total cost of collecting and disposal has been £3,458 17s. 9d., or about 7s. 8¼d. per load. The following is the expenditure for dusting during the year, viz.— Cost of collection:— £ s. d. Wages 1,510 10 5 Board's horses 612 13 8 Cost of disposal:— Newington Vestry 328 10 11 Railway charges 916 17 2 Repairs and renewals of plant 142 12 7 3,511 4 9 Cr. Trade refuse (261¾ loads) 52 7 0 £3,458 17 9 The scavenging work is performed by men employed by the Board, by hired carts, and by the Board's horses and vans; 1,746 one-horse cart loads and 5,015 van loads have been cleared from the roads and 2,183 cart loads from gullies. The following is the cost for the year, viz. :— £ s. d. £ s. d. Wages, including sweepers and carmen 2,856 10 3 Cartage, contractor's horses and carmen 435 5 9 „ Board's horses 488 5 4 923 11 1 Shoots 536 8 9 Tools 163 1 4 Removing snow and sanding roads during frost 113 9 8 4,593 1 1 Cr. Received for road grit, 52 cart loads and 585 van loads 23 4 9 £4,569 16 4 67 In the Parish of Putney, the collection of house refuse during the past year has been carried out by the Board with their own horses and vans and men in their employ. The refuse has been shot into barges and removed by Mr. Henry Covington. The total expenses incurred in collecting and disposing of the refuse during the year are as follows, viz.:— £ s. d. Wages 445 7 1 Cost of maintenance of horses, including depreciation on first cost 283 6 3 Depreciation on 6 dust vans (£o01 10s. at 10 per cent.) 30 3 0 Repairs to vans 11 4 10 New baskets, ladders, slops, various tools, and repairs to same 10 1 11 Paid Mr. Covington for removing dust by barge 384 4 1 1,164 7 2 Cr. Cash received for removal of trade refuse 8 2 10 £1,156 4 4 The total number of van loads collected during the year was 3,710, or 11,130 cubic yards, at a cost of about 2s. 1d. per cubic yard, showing a decrease of ½d. per yard on last year. The scavenging work is performed by men employed by the Board, and principally by their own horses and vans, the smaller share of the work being done by hired horses and men. The following is the cost for the year, viz.:— £ s. d. Wages 1,551 19 7 Cost of maintenance of horses, including depreciation on first cost 318 9 4 Hire of horses and men 176 16 0 Carried forward £2,047 4 11 f 2 68 Brought forward 2,047 4 11 Depreciation on carts and scraper (£138 12s. Id. at 10 per cent.) 13 17 3 Yarious tools and repairs to vans, &c. 38 7 2 Water 17 10 4 Brooms 70 11 9 £2,187 11 5 In the Parish of Streatham, the collection and disposal of the house refuse have been carried out by the contractor, Mr. G. Neal, under a three years' contract, for the sum of £2,131 13s. 4d. The cost of scavenging has been £5,688 17s. Id., made up as follows, viz.:— £ s. d. Wages 3,384 10 4 Brooms and tools 241 3 10 Horse hire 121 0 3 Contracts for cartage and disposal of slop 1,942 3 2 £5,688 17 7 In the Parish of Tooting, the removal and disposal of dust and house refuse have been carried out by Mr. H. J. Brigden, under a two years' contract, which terminated on the 25th March, 1897, for the sum of £180. The cost of scavenging has been £450 17s. 2d. made up as follows, viz.:— £ s. d. Wages 257 17 5 Horse hire 12 19 9 Contract for cartage and disposal of slop 180 £450 0 17 0 2 69 In the Parish of Wandsworth, the collection and disposal of house refuse were satisfactorily carried out under contract by Mr E. King for the sum of £2,485. Most of the house refuse collected was shot into barges alongside Bell Lane wharf, and the remainder was carted outside the Board's district. Mr. King has entered into a contract to collect and dispose of the house refuse for three years ending 25th March, 1900, at £2,560 per annum. The approximate number of one-horse loads collected during the year was 7,886. The requests for the removal of dust numbered 90, as against 84 for the previous year. The scavenging and cleansing of gullies is performed by the Board's employes and by hired horses, the carts used being the property of the Board. During the year 18,706 one-horse loads of slop svere collected, 2,319 loads being carted to private shoots, 3,764 loads to the Burr Road shoot, 8,116 loads to the Lydden Road shoot, the remainder (4,507 loads) being used in filling up ditches and excavations in various parts of the parish. 70 ROAD WATERING. The details of road watering during the past year are set forth in the following tabular statement:— PARISH. Length of Road Watered. Expenditure. Horse Hire. New Carts, Vans, and Standposts. Water, Labour, and Repairs to Carts, 4tc. Total Expenses. M. F. Y. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Clapham 28 0 84 *953 1 8 . 854 8 9 1817 10 6 Pumey 22 0 196 †384 15 3 6 0 0 682 7 7 1073 2 10 Streatham 35 6 136 947 10 9 319 10 0 1077 1 7 2344 2 4 Tooting 4 7 62 106 12 1 46 10 0 126 3 4 278 6 6 Wandsworth 33 3 123 750 12 0 13 2 0 700 17 9 1514 11 9 Total 124 2 160 3,152 11 9 385 2 0 3,489 19 0 7,027 12 9 * Including the sum of £35 1s. 8d. for the work of horses belonging to the Board, † Including the sum of £121 16s. 3d. for the work of horses belonging to the Board. In the Parish of Clapham all the water was obtained by meter; 5,373,000 gallons at 1s. per 1,000 gallons (subject to a discount of 10 per cent.) from the Lambeth Water Works Company and 6,233,000 gallons at 8½d. per 1,000 gallons from the Southwark and Yauxhall Water Company, the cost of which, including the hire of meters and standposts, amounted to £584 1s. 9d, being equal to £20 16s. 6d. per mile of road watered. The total cost of road watering amounted to £64 16s. Od. per mile. In the Parish of Putney, the cost of road watering was £48 10s. 4d. per mile, of which sum £16 13s. 8d. was paid to the water companies for the supply of water and hire of meters. The quantity of water used was 9,891,000 gallons. 71 In the Parish of Streatham the following roads were added to the previous list for watering, viz.:—Sainfoin Road, Yerran Road, Criffel Avenue (1st portion), Thornton Avenue (first portion), Foxbourne Road, Tankerville Road (second portion), Childebert Road, Amesbury Avenue (second portion), Emsworth Street, Ritherdon Road, and Hitherfield Road, making the total length watered about 35¾ miles. All the water was obtained from the Lambeth Water Company.—15,399,500 gallons at Is. per 1,000, high level, and 292,000 gallons at 8½d. per 1,000 low level; these prices are subject to a discount of 10 per cent. The total quantity used was 15,691,500 gallons, the cost of which, including the hire of meters, &c., amounted to £929 16s. 9d., being equal to £25 19s. 1d., per mile of road watered. The total cost of road watering amounted to £65 8s. 7d. per mile. In the Parish of Tooting, the following roads were added to the previous list for watering, viz.:—Aldis Street, and Carlwell Street, making the total length watered about 5 miles. All the water was obtained by meter from the Lambeth Water Company,—437,000 gallons at Is. per 1,000, high level, and 2,210,720 gallons at 8½d per 1,000, low level; these prices are subject to a discount of 10 per cent. The total quantity used was 2,647,720 gallons, the cost of which, including the hire of meters, &c., amounted to £117 19s, 3d., being equal to £24 0s 5d., per mile of road watered. The total cost of road watering amounted to £56 13s 5d. per mile. In the Parish of Wandsworth, all the water was obtained by meter,—1.355,000 gallons at Is. per 1,000 gallons and 980,000 gallons at 8½d. per 1,000 gallons (subject to a discount of 10 per cent.) from the Lambeth Water Company, and 11,553,000 gallons at 8½d per 1,000 gallons, 82,000 gallons at a minimum rent of £4 11s. per annum, 44,000 gallons at a minimum rent of £3 15s. 72 per anunm, 38,000 gallons at 9d. per 1,000 gallons, and 201,000 gallons at 8d. per 1,000 gallons, from the Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company, the cost of which, including the hire of meters and standposts, amounted to £614 8s. 2d. The quantity of water used for street watering was about 12,578,500 gallons. In addition to this quantity there were used: for flushing sewers and drains, 1,067,000 gallons, for repairs to public roads 182,000 gallons, for making up new roads, 37,000 gallons, for improvements 22,000 gallons, for urinals 283,000 gallons, for washing water-carts, &c. on wharf 82,000 gallons, and for private works 1,500 gallons. The total cost of road watering per mile was £45 5s. 9d., of which sum £15 13s. 9d. was paid to the water companies for water and the hire of meters, &c. The total number of standposts is eight in the Lambeth Water Company's district and 30 in the Southwark and Yauxhall Water Company's district. NEW BUILDINGS. The details of the Notices for the erection of new buildings are as follows:— PARISH. No of Notices Received. No. of Houses. Additions to Houses, &c. Stabling, Warehouses, Shops and other Buildings. No.of Churches, Chapels, Schools, and additions to same. Total number of Buildings. Clapham 63 262 2 18 9 291 Putney 81 211 30 15 4 260 Streatham 360 851 32 30 12 925 Tooting 35 314 2 4 2 322 Wandsworth 115 157 23 38 8 226 Totals 654 1,795 89 105 35 2,024 73 LIGHTING. In the Parish of Clapham, 6 lamps burning 5 cubic feet of gas per hour, 9 burning 10 cubic feet per hour, and 1 obelisk lamp have been added. Seven lamps have been shifted in position. In the Parish of Putney, 8 lamps have been added and 15 shifted in the district of the Wandsworth Gas Company, and 2 lamps have been added in the district of the Brentford Gas Company. Twenty incandescent gas burners, with anti-vibration suspension frames and new lanterns, have been fixed on Putney Hill, in place of the old ordinary burners and lanterns, at a cost of £2 16s 2d. per lamp. The charge made by the Incandescent Gas Light Company for maintaining these burners and frames is 15s, per lamp per annum, and the Wandsworth Gas Company have reduced their charge from £3 7s. 6d. to £2 17s 6d. per lamp per annum for lighting and maintaining, which shows an additional cost of 5s. per lamp per annum over ordinary lamps. The illumination of each new incandescent burner, however, is 60-candle power, whereas the ordinary burner has only an illuminating power of 14 candles. In the Parish of Streatham, 29 lamps have been added, 19 increased from 5 feet to 10 feet burners, and 15 shifted, making the total number 1,163. In the Parish of Tooting, 4 lamps have been added and 2 shifted, making the total number 141 g. 74 In the Parish of Wandsworth, 42 new lamps have been erected within the district of the Wandsworth and Putney Gas Company. The total number of lamps lighted with gas in the parish is 1,156½. The number of lamps in each parish, and the charges for lighting, &c., are shown in the table on the following page. DETAILS OF LIGHTING. PARISH. Wandsworth and Putney Gas Oompaht. (a) South Metropolitan Gas Company. Mitcham Gas Company. BreNtford Gas Company. Total Number of Lamps in each Parish. Number of Lamps at £3 7 6. By meter at 2 s. 4 d. per 1000 feet. Total N umber Number of Lamps at £3 3 9. Number of Lamps at £3 4 9. Number of Lamps at £3 13 9. Number of Lamps at £5 12 0. By meter at 2s. 3d. per 1000 feet. Total Number. Number of Lamps at £4 4 0. Number of Lamps at £3 7 6. (b) By meter at 3s. 8d. per 1000 feet. Total Number. Number of Lamps at £3 14 5. CLAPHAM .. .. .. 910 21 .. 33 12 976 .. .. .. .. .. 976 (c) PUTNEY 489 (d) .. 4 89 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 68 557 (e) STREATHAM .. .. .. 924½ 9 39 82 5 1059J 103½ .. .. 103½ •• 1163 TOOTING .. .. •• ½ .. .. .. .. ½ 9 129 3 141 .. 141½ WANDSWORTH 1148 .. 1148 •• .. .. .. .. .. ½ •• • • ½ .. 1148½(f) Totals 1 637 .. 1,637 1,835 30 39 115 17 2,036 113 129 3 245 68 3,986 (a) The prices charged by the South Metropolitan Gas Company are subject to a discount of 5 per cent, on payment within a month of quarter day. (b) These lamps are extinguished at midnight. (c) Exclusive of one obelisk lamp, without a meter, the charge for which is based upon the average consumption of the other meter lamps. (d) The charge for 20 of these lamps has been reduced to £% 17s. 6d. each per annum, in consequence of their being fitted with incandescent burners. (e) Exclusive of two 90-light Sugg's lamps fixed in front of the Railway Station, lighted by the L. & S. W. Rail. Co., and the cost of two ordinary lamps only charged to the Board, one special lamp at £10 3s. 4d. per annum, one at £9 5s. 4d., two at £8 16s. 8d., and two double lamps at £5 18s. 8d. each per annum. (f) Exclusive of the large lamp at the East Hill urinal, charged as two ordinary lamps, one lamp at the Town Hall towards the cost of which the Board contribute £10 per annum, one Schulke lamp at West Hill at £9 5s. 2d. per annum, one Sugg's 4-light lamp at fountain at ,£19 6s. per annum, and one double lamp at Summerstown at £6 2s. 10d., one at Trinity Road at £6 4s. 4d., one at Bramford Road at £5 17s. 8d. per annum, and one at York Road at £5 17s. 8d. per annum. 76 SALE OF FOOD, &c„ ACTS. During the past year, 555 samples of various articles of food and drink have been purchased by the Board and analysed by the public analyst. Of these 530 were reported to be genuine. In 14 cases, in which the articles were found to be slightly adulterated, the vendors were cautioned or the Board made no order in the matter. In 11 cases proceedings were taken against the vendors, with the following results, viz.:— Articles. Case No. Extent of Adulteration. Fines or other Result. Butter 1864 40 per cent, of margarine Fined £2 and 12s. 6d. costs. (not butter) „ 1865 80 ,, „ ,, ,, 5s. and 12s. 6d. costs. (not butter) ,, 1900 60 ,, „ (not butter) ,, 12s. 6d. costs. Milk 1962 12 „ of extraneous water „ 2s. and 12s. 6d. costs. „ 2083 8 ,, ,, ,, Summons dismissed. „ 2199 37 ,, deficiency of cream Fined £3 and 12s. 6d. costs. „ 2296 18 „ „ ,, „ £2 and 12s. 6d costs. Butter 2331 45 ,, of margarine ,, £2 and 12s. 6d. costs. (not butter) Milk 2337 12 „ of extraneous water „ 5s. and 12s. 6d. costs. Butter 2341 88 ,, of margarine ,, £1 and 12s. 6d. costs. (not butter) Milk 2353 9 ,, of extraneous water ,, £1 and 12s. 6d. costs. In case 2083 the summons was dismissed by the magistrate after reference to the authorities at Somerset House, who were of opinion that the sample did not afford conclusive evidence of the presence of added water. LONDON (EQUALIZATION OF RATES) ACT, 1894. The following sums have been received by the Board under the provisions of this Act, viz.: — Date. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth, Totals for the District. £. s. d. £. s. d. £. s. d. £. s. d. £. s. d. £ s. d. 7th Feb., 1895 810 8 0 331 9 4 864 16 6 108 3 4 928 4 5 3,048 1 7 28th Sept. „ 828 16 9 349 14 6 905 10 11 108 8 7 918 17 5 3,141 8 2 24th Oct. „ 7 13 7 3 3 9 8 3 11 1 0 6 8 15 11 28 17 8 23rd Jan., 1896 828 16 9 349 14 6 905 10 11 108 8 7 948 17 5 3,141 8 2 26th Sept. ,, 853 3 11 373 14 2 987 7 9 132 15 2 1,055 15 4 3,402 16 4 10th Feb., 1897 771 8 1 337 17 8 892 14 8 120 0 8 954 11 2 3,076 12 3 Totals £4,100 7 1 1,750 13 11 4,564 4 8 578 16 10 4,845 1 8 15,839 4 2 77 SCHOOL BOARD PRECEPTS. The following are the amounts of the Precepts of the School Board for London paid by this District (omitting the Parish of Battersea):— £ s. d. d. 1871-72 877 7 1 = •48 in the £ on rateable value 1872-73 1671 9 3 = •89 „ ,, 1873-74 1381 14 10 = •74 „ 1874-75 3405 11 7 = 1.75 „ ,, 1875-76 6012 17 3 = 3.00 „ ,, 1876-77 9208 12 8 = 4.50 „ „ 1877-78 11818 9 8 = 5.23 „ ,, 1878-79 12182 15 2 = 5.15 „ „ 1879-80 13579 1 3 = 5.50 „ ,, 1880-81 16065 8 3 = 6.28 „ ,, 1881-82 17106 3 5 = 6.15 „ „ 1882-83 17227 13 5 = 5.93 „ ,, 1883-84 20890 10 5 = 6.86 „ „ 1884-85 25460 5 1 = 8.00 „ ,, 1885-86 28944 4 10 = 8.64 „ „ 1886-87 32283 0 10 = 8.86 „ ,, 1887-88 31203 16 2 = 8.36 „ ,, 1888-89 30732 17 1 = 7.97 „ ,, 1889-90 35367 3 6 = 8.88 „ „ 1890-91 43863 18 4 = 10.68 ,, „ 1891-92 47072 13 4 = 10.71 „ ,, 1892-93 46427 10 3 = 10.45 ,, ,, 1893-94 46155 16 6 = 10.20 „ ,, 1894-95 48246 4 0 = 10.46 ,, „ 1895-96 54735 14 11 = 11.50 ,, „ 1896-97 61755 18 10 = 12.32 ,, „ (The foregoing rate is based upon the full rateable value. If empty houses, rates irrecoverable, and cost of collection are taken into account at least Id. in the £ per annum should be added to arrive at the rate actually paid.) 78 RATES. The following table shows the amount in the £ of the respective rates therein mentioned which have been levied by the Overseers of the several Parishes in the District during the last seven years, viz.:— PARISH. Year. Poor Rate. General Rate. Sewers Rate. Lighting Rate. Totals. Clapham 8. d. 8. rf. S. d. S. d. 8. d. 1890 3 4 2 2½ — 3 — 3 6 0½ 1891 3 0 2 6 — 3 — 3 6 0 1892 3 0½ 2 4 — 3 — 2½ 5 10 1893 3 6 2 6½ — 3½ — 3 6 7 1894 3 8½ 2 7½ — 3 — 3 6 10 1895 3 8 2 8½ — 2½ — 3 6 10 1896 3 7 2 8 — 2 — 3 6 8 Putney 1890 3 5 2 5 — 5 — 3 6 6 1891 2 11 2 4 — 5 — 3 5 11 1892 3 3 2 4 — 5 — 3 6 3 1893 3 6 2 4 — 4½ — 3½ 6 6 1894 3 10 2 4 — 5 — 4 6 11 1895 3 9½ 2 5 — 4 — 4 6 10½ 1896 3 8 2 4 — 3½ — 3½ 6 7 Streatham 1890 3 3 1 11 — 4 — 4 5 10 1891 3 0 2 0 — 2½ — 2½ 5 5 1892 3 2 2 2 — 2 — 2 5 8 1893 3 6 2 2 — 3 — 3 6 2 1894 3 7½ 2 2½ — 4 — 3 6 5 1895 3 6 2 2 — 3 — 3 6 2 1896 3 74 2 3 — 3 — 3 6 4½ Tooting 1890 3 6 2 4 — 4 — 6 6 8 1891 3 4 2 4 — 4 — 6 6 6 1892 3 1 2 5 — 3 — 6 6 3 1893 3 6 2 10 — 2 — 6 7 0 1894 3 4 2 8 — 2 — 6 6 8 1895 3 8 2 9 — 2 — 6 7 1 1896 3 10 2 9½ — 4 — 4½ 7 4 Wandsvorth 1890 3 5 2 1 — 1 — 4 5 11 1891 3 1 2 2 — 1 — 3 5 7 1892 3 1 2 0 — 2 — 4 5 7 1893 3 4 2 5 — 3 — 3 6 3 1894 3 10 2 7 — 4 — 3 7 0 1895 3 9 2 8½ — 2 — 4 6 11½ 1896 3 8 2 6 — 2 — 3 6 7 79 CENSUS RETURNS. PARISH. Population. Number of Houses. In 1871. In 1881. In 1891. In 1896. Inhabited 1881. Uninhabited 1881. Inhabited 1891. Uninhabited 1891. Clapham 27347 36380 43698 46953 5604 207 6994 318 Putney 9439 13235 1777 1 20566 2123 100 2987 235 Streatham 12148 21611 42958 54338 3452 371 7048 505 Tooting 2327 3942 5784 7306 715 148 1085 102 Wandsworth 19783 28004 46720 58101 4249 410 7284 403 Totals. 71,044 103,172 156,931 187,264 16,143 1,236 25,398 1,563 RATEABLE VALUE AND AREA OF DISTRICT. The rateable value and area of the several parishes in the District are as follows :— PARISH. Value as per Valuation List, April 5th, 189(i. Value as per Valuation List, April 5th, 1897. Area. ./ £ £ Clapham 295,976 301,303 1,137 Putney 180,523 185,147 2,235 Streathara 407,930 423,659 2,914 Tooting 33,6*2 34,433 566 Wandsworth 321,797 333,146 2,433 Totals £1,239,888 £1,277,688 9,285 By order of the Board of Works for the Wandsworth District, HENRY GEORGE HILLS, Clerk to the Board. Kaht Hill, Wandsworth, S.W., June, 1897. 80 STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO DURING THE YEAR ENDED 25TH MARCH, 1897. Dates of Contracts. Names and Addresses of Contractors. Nature of Contracts. 1896. 1st April. A. C. W. HOBMAN, Cliftonville, South Bermondsey. For tar-paving works and materials in Putney, for one year from the 25th March, 1896. " " W. R. WILLIAMS, 98, High Street, Putney. For drainage and jobbing works in Putney for the like period. " " T. CRONK, 33, Streatham Place, Brixton Hill. For horse-hire (day work) in Ward No. 2, Streatham, for the like perio.d. " " J. S. GABRIEL, 67, Belvedere Road, Lambeth. For the supply of pit flints in Wards Nos. 2 and 3, Streatham, for the like period. " " A. C. W. HOBMAN, Cliftonville, South Bermondsey. For tar-paving works and materials in Streatham and Tooting for the like period. " " H. J. SANTER, High Street, Tooting. For horse-hire (day work) in Tooting for the like period. " " POTTER, BATTEN & DAVIES, 23, The Pavement, Clapham. For printing for three years from the 25th March, 1896. " " J. TRUSCOTT & SON, Suffolk Lane, E.C. For the supply of stationery for the like period. 15th April. A. SAWYER, 54, Willington Road, Stockwell. For horse-hire in Clapham for one year from the 25th March, 1896. " " C. R. WHITMEE. York Road, Wandsworth. For the supply of two water vans in Wandsworth. 29th „ J. DICKESON, Junr., 8, Laitwood Road, Balham. For sewer works at Balham High Road. 13th May. J. S. GABRIEL, 67, Belvedere Road, Lambeth. For masons' and paviors' work in Streatham and Tooting for two years from the 25th March, 1896. " " THE WOULDHAM CEMENT Coy., 39, Lime Street, E.C. For the supply of Portland cement in Wandsworth. 10th June. J. H. KING, 23, Falcon Grove, Battersea. For the construction of sewers at Lammermoor Road, Martindale Road, and Kenilford Road, Streatham. 22nd July. H. BRIGDEN, The Broadway, Lower Tooting. For scavenging Ward No. 1, Streatham, from the 3rd August, 1896, to 25th March, 1897. " " H. BRIGDEN, The Broadway, Lower Tooting. For horse-hire (day-work) in Tooting for the like period. " " H. BRIGDEN, The Broadway, Lower Tooting. For the supply of pit flints in Tooting for the like period. " " YEOMAN, SPRIGGS & CO., 4, Shrubbery Road, Streatham. For painting works, &c., at Surveyor's Offices, 158, Streatham High Road, S.W. " " J. DICKESON, Junr., 15, Laitwood Road, Balham. For construction of sewer in Leigham Court Road West, Streatham. 5th Aug. C. F. NEWMAN, Tooting. For the supply of gravel in Tooting from the 3rd August, 1896 to the 25th March, 1897. 28 h Oct. G. NEAL, Th« Farm, Wandsworth Common. For dusting in Streatham for one year from the 25th March, 1897. 81 STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS—continued. Dates of Contracts. Names and Addresses of Contractors. Nature of Contracts. 1896. 23th Oct. G.-NEAL, The Farm, Wandsworth Common. For scavenging in Streatham for three years from 25th March, 1897. " " E. WOODLEYj Plough Road, Tooting. For dusting in Tooting for one year from 25th March, 1897. 21st Nov. ROSE & SONS. Beulah Hill, Norwood. For setting back fences. &c., at Nos. 38,40, 42, and 44, Streatham Hill. 23rd Dec. A. WELLINGS, 8, Westbourne Terrace, Garratt Lane. For constructing brick sewer on Furzedown or Totterdown estate in Streatham and Tooting 1897. 12th Jan. G. & W. P. STEVENSON, 37, Balham Hill. For repairing water carts, &c., in Streatham and Tooting. 17th Feb. G. CANDLER & SON., 258a, Brixton Hill. For re-building boundary walls. &c., at Brynbella and Denham House, Streatham High Road. 19th Mar. NEWINGTON VESTRY. For receiving dust and house refuse from Clapham for one year from the 25th March, 1897. 17th G. NEAL, The Farm, Wandsworth Common. For horse-hire in Clapham for the like period. " " W. R. WILLIAMS. 98, High Street, Putney. For drainage and jobbing works in Putney for the like period. " " B. NOWELL & CO., Warwick Road, Kensington. For masons'and paviors' work in Putney for three years from the 25th March, 1S97. " " G. NEAL. The Farm, Wandsworth Common. For the supply of pit flints in Wards Nos. 2 and 3, Streatham, for one year from the 25th March, 1897- " " G. NEAL, The Farm, Wandsworth Common. For horse-hire (day work) in Ward No. 1, Streatham, for two years from the 25th March, 1897. "" " J. IVE, 171, Eardley Road, Streatham, For horse-hire (day work) in Ward No. 3, Streatham, for three years from 25th March, 1897. " " G. NEAL, The Farm, Wandsworth Common. For the supply of pit flints in Tooting for one year from the 25th March, 1897. " " G. NEAL, The Farm, Wandsworth Common. For horse-hire (barge work) in Tooting for the like period, " " E. KING, 13, South Street, Wandsworth. For dusting in Wandsworth for three years from 25th March, 1897- " " W. HAMPTON, 45, Red Lion Street, Wandsworth. For the supply of gravel and flints in Wandsworth for the like period. " " A. GRANVILLE & CO., 102, High Street, Battersea. For the supply pf disinfectants for the like period. " " S. PONTIFEX & CO., 2flJ, Coleman Street, E.C. For the supply of lamp columns, &c., in so much of the District as is not lighted by the South Metropolitan Gas Company for the like period. 82 ESTABLISHMENT EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. Clerk 600 0 0 Solicitor 150 0 0 Office Clerks 1087 11 0 Messenger and Office Boy 125 18 0 Analyst's Fees 286 9 0 Inspector under Adulteration of Food, &c., Acts 130 0 0 Purchase of Articles for Analysis, Inspector's Expenses, &c 53 8 4 Examination of Gas 50 0 0 Officers' Guarantee Premiums 21 5 0 Rates, Taxes, Gas, and Water Supply 168 9 3 Rent of Telephones 75 10 0 Contribution towards cost of Water supplied to Drinking Troughs and Fountains 40 0 0 Stationery, Printing, Postage, and Advertisements 1005 18 9 Stamping Contracts 23 0 0 Instalment of Loan for Erection of Offices of the Board 350 0 0 Interest on ditto ditto 150 1 3 Law Expenses :— £ s. d. Application for Injunction re Electric Lighting Transformer Chambers 133 3 6 Local Government Board Inquiry re Water Supply 27 5 0 Miscellaneous 24 1 9 184 10 3 Parliamentary Expenses 9 12 6 Fees to Medical Practitioners for Certificates under the Public Health (London) Act, 1691* 200 1 6 Office fittings, repairs, &c 15 12 I Miscellaneous 140 10 7 £4,867 17 5 * These fees are repaid to the Board by the Metropolitan Asylums Board. 83 MONEY OWING TO BOARD. 1897. March 25th. £ s. d. Overseers of Clapham (precept) 2,000 .0 6 " Streatham ( ,, ) 500 0 0 Mr. W. J. Little 1 18 8 Lambeth Water Company 192 11 6 Wandsworth Gas Company 73 8 11 Mr. W. Hampton 30 4 2 London, Chatham and Dover Railway Company 30 0 0 Croydon Highway Board . 18 0 0 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 115 14 11 Mr. J. Moyle 2 0 2 Mr. J. Bowles 4 3 1 Mr. G. Neal 3 0 0 Mr. C. Watts 3 9 10 County of London &c. Electric Lighting Company 38 9 3 Overseers of Clapham (Rent) 17 10 0 Sundry other debtors 8 13 11 £3,039 4 5 MONEY OWING BY BOARD. 1897. March 25th. £ s. d. Customs Fund Office (Loans) 1,483 6 8 Clergy Mutual Assurance Society (") 2,133 6 8 London County Council ( ,, ) 61,999 0 11 School Board (Precept) 15,173 16 2 Sundry other Creditors (usual monthly bills, since paid) 3,469 15 4 Ditto—(Private Drains and other works) 583 12 2 £81,842 17 0 84 Receipts and Payments for the March 25th, 1896. £ s d. £ s. d. Balance in hands of Clerk 813 4 1 34,175 9 11 ,, ,, Bankers 33,362 5 10 RECEIPTS. March 2otb, 1897. £ s. d. Clapham General Rate 37,635 18 2 ,, Sewers ,, 3,028 18 5 „ Lighting „ 3,470 3 2 „ New Roads 2,549 7 1 46,684 6 10 Putney General Rate 22,772 1 6 „ Sewers ,, 2,865 16 8 „ Lighting 2,397 11 10 „ New Roads 1,849 19 3 29,885 9 3 Streatham General Rate 52,619 13 9 „ Sewers , 5,010 6 5 „ Lighting 4,474 12 2 ,, New Koads 12,S93 8 0 74,998 0 4 Tooting General Rate 4,441 4 2 * „ Sewers ,, 604 1« 6 „ Lighting 474 4 0 „ New Roads 230 3 8 5,750 8 4 Wandsworth General Rate 42,120 19 6 ,, Sewers „ 2,873 9 5 „ Lighting 4,346 16 4 ,, New Roads 6,068 13 J 55,409 18 10 212,728 3 7 London County Council (Loan No. 68) 1,600 0 0 " " " ( " 69) 1,550 0 0 " " " ( " 1 70) 1,800 0 0 " " " ( " 71) 500 0 0 " " " (" 72) 2,100 0 0 Total Receipts 220,178 8 7 £254,353 13 6 85 Year ended 25th March, 1897. March 25th, 1897. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ s. d. Clapham General Rate 36,121 16 0 202,909 2 4 ,, Sewers 1,453 13 6 „ Lighting „ 3,154 18 2 „ New Roads 1,852 18 11 42,583 6 7 Putney General Rate 23,610 8 3 ,, Sewers „ 1,060 14 8 „ Lighting „ 1,993 13 5 ,, New Roads 1,924 3 7 28,588 19 11 Stieatham General Rate 51,955 2 5 „ Sewers 3,807 16 11 „ Lighting „ 3,903 15 10 „ New Roads 12,932 0 2 72,598 15 4 Tooting General Rate 4,058 1 7 „ Sewers ,, 485 19 1 „ Lighting 538 3 8 „ New Roads 113 8 6 5,195 12 10 Wandsworth General Rate 42,554 10 3 „ Sewers „ 2,701 0 0 „ Lighting 3,892 8 10 „ New Roads 4,794 8 7 53,942 7 8 Atlas Assurance Company (Loans, as per Appendix "A." 2,033 6 8 Customs Fund Office (Loans, as per Appendix " A.") 1,483 6 8 Clergy Mutual Assurance Society (Loans, as per Appendix "A.") 1,466 13 4 London County Council (Loans, as per Appendix "A.") 7,147 0 0 12,130 6 8 Total Payments 216,039 9 0 Balance in hands of Clerk 874 3 10 39,314 4 6 ,, „ Bankers 38,440 0 8 £254,353 13 6 Examined and allowed by us, (Signed) Sidney M. Quennell, Auditors. Fkedk. Ebwoob, 11th May, 1897. APPENDI'X A. THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT. Account in detail, showing the Receipts and Expenditure of the Board for the year ended March 25th, 1897. ACCOUNT. Balances on 25th March, 1896. RECEIPTS. Balances on 26th March, 1897. From Overseers. Under Equalisation or Rates Act. Contributions towards Sewers. Private Drains. Making up New Roads. Establishment. Other Receipts. Total Receipts. Making up New Roads. Highways. Improvements. Dusting Watering. Construction of Sewers. Repairing Sewers. Cleansing Sewers. Private Drain and other Works. Lighting public Lamps Salaries (exclusive of Establishment Charges). Establishment Charges. School Board Expenses. Interest on Loans. Sundries. Total Payments. In Favour. Against. Paid by Owners. Paid by Board. In Favour. Against. Clapham: £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £, s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ 8. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. General Rate 9092 14 7 33530 7 3 1624 12 0 .. 22 6 0 .. 198 0 5 2260 12 6 37635 18 2 .. 10551 1 5 .. 3511 4 9 1817 10 5 •• •• .. 1043 0 4 .. 1431 16 9 861 8 11 14984 18 0 432 16 5 898 2 7 35531 19 7 .. 7578 12 5 (1) Sewers Rate 2419 2 1 2600 0 0 .. .. 379 8 4 .. 49 10 1 .. 3028 18 5 .. .. .. .. •• •• 178 18 5 79 2 0 252 11 1 333 10 9 .. 183 18 9 215 7 3 .. 122 6 8 119 6 1 1485 1 0 .. 843 17 2 (2) Lighting Rate 828 2 3 3470 3 2 .. .. .. .. 3470 3 2 .. .. .. ..' •• •• •• .. .. .. 3154 18 2 .. .. .. .. .. 3154 18 2 1143 7 3 .. New Roads, &c., Account 904 8 11 •• • • .. 2549 7 1 .. .. 2549 7 1 1852 18 11 .. .. .. •• •• •• .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1852 18 11 1600 17 1 .. 1732 11 2 11511 16 8 39600 10 5 1624 12 0 • • 401 14 4 2549 7 1 247 10 6 2260 12 6 46684 6 10 1852 18 11 10551 1 5 .. 3511 4 9 1817 10 5 •• 178 18 5 79 2 0 252 11 1 1376 11 1 3154 18 2 1615 15 6 1076 16 2 14984 18 0 555 3 1 1017 8 8 42024 17 8 2744 4 4 8422 9 7 Putney : General Rate 4654 19 9 19617 19 0 711 11 10 27 8 6 .. 121 4 2 2293 18 0 22772 1 6 .. 7345 19 0 90 19 4 1132 7 0 1073 2 10 •• •• .. .. 391 5 5 .. 1074 12 6 527 5 9 9084 16 11 298 16 5 555 5 7 21604 10 9 .. 5493 6 6 (3) Sewers Rate 3119 5 1 2354 10 2 .. 481 0 6 .. 30 6 0 .. 2865 16 8 .. .. .. •• •• 104 9 2 17 11 1 124 15 10 340 3 0 .. 150 4 9 131 16 5 .. 156 13 4 40 18 7 1066 12 2 .. 1314 3 1 (4) Lighting Rate 1009 3 1 2397 11 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2397 11 10 .. .. .. .. •• •• •• .. .. .. 1993 13 5 .. .. .. .. .. 1993 13 5 1413 1 6 .. New Roads, &c., Account 325 12 11 •• •• .. 1849 19 3 .. •• 1849 19 3 1924 3 7 .. .. .. •• •• •• .. .. .. •• .. •• .. .. .. 1924 3 7 .. 399 17 3 1009 3 1 8099 17 9 24370 1 0 711 11 10 .. 508 9 0 1849 19 3 151 10 2 2293 18 0 29885 9 3 1924 3 7 7345 19 0 90 19 4 1162 7 0 1073 2 10 .. 104 9 2 17 11 1 124 15 10 731 8 5 1993 13 0 1224 17 3 669 2 2 9084 16 11 455 9 9 596 4 2 26588 19 11 1413 1 6 7207 6 10 Streatham : General Rate 7922 2 2 44053 14 0 1880 2 5 .. 47 6 0 .. 272 18 6 6365 12 10 52619 13 9 .. 15468 7 7 2015 6 1 •• •• .. .. 1962 16 5 .. 1898 10 1 1187 5 10 19972 4 6 106 3 10 1942 19 2 49411 1 4 7257 16 10 (5) Sewers Rate 2375 6 9 3874 12 4 .. 26 11 0 1019 12 6 .. 68 1 7 21 6 0 5010 6 5 .. .. .. 2213 5 6 2344 2 4 9 2 4 575 7 5 399 3 10 653 8 5 958 4 0 .. 311 18 4 296 16 5 .. 136 16 11 453 18 11 3804 16 7 .. 1172 17 3 (6) Lighting Rate 1343 1 1 4474 12 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 4474 12 2 .. .. .. .. •• •• •• .. .. .. 3903 15 10 .. .. .. .. .. 3903 15 10 1913 17 5 .. New Roads, &c., Account 2395 4 8 •• •• .. 12893 8 0 .. •• 12893 8 0 12932 0 2 .. .. .. • • .. •• •• .. .. .. .. •• •• .. .. 12932 0 2 2356 12 6 .. 3738 5 9 10297 8 11 52402 18 6 1880 2 5 26 11 0 1066 18 6 12893 8 0 341 3 1 6386 18 10 74998 0 4 12932 0 2 15468 7 7 +2015 6 1 2213 5 6 2344 2 4 19 2 4 575 7 5 399 3 10 653 8 5 2921 0 5 3903 15 10 2210 8 5 1484 2 3 19972 4 6 543 0 9 2396 18 1 70051 13 11 4270 9 11 8430 8 1 Tooting : General Rate 278 1 4 3864 19 2 252 15 10 .. 7 0 0 .. 22 10 5 293 18 9 4441 4 2 1418 8 5 .. 186 15 10 278 5 5 •• •• .. .. 43 8 3 .. 189 2 5 97 19 6 1704 7 11 7 0 0 132 13 10 4058 1 7 661 3 11 .. Sewers Rate .. 47 3 7 427 1 8 .. 16 1 0 154 3 3 .. 5 12 7 1 18 0 604 16 6 .. .. .. .. • • •• 46 11 0 105 13 7 104 12 0 172 9 7 .. 27 5 7 24 9 10 .. 4 17 6 .. 485 19 1 71 13 10 .. (8) Lighting Rate 334 14 3 474 4 0 .. .. .. .. .. .. 474 4 0 .. .. .. .. • • •• •• .. .. .. 538 3 8 .. .. .. .. .. 538 3 8 270 14 7 .. New Roads, &c., Account .. 149 1 7 .. .. .. 230 3 8 .. • 230 3 8 113 8 6 .. .. •• • • •• .. .. .. .. .. •• .. •• .. •• 113 8 6 .. 32 6 5 wandsworth : 612 15 7 196 5 2 4766 4 10 252 15 10 16 1 0 161 3 3 230 3 8 28 3 0 295 16 9 5750 8 4 113 8 6 1418 8 5 .. 186 15 10 27! 5 5 •• 46 11 0 105 13 7 104 12 0 215 17 10 538 3 8 216 8 0 122 9 4 1704 7 11 11 17 6 132 13 10 5195 12 10 1003 12 4 32 6 5 General Rate 14336 8 3 37216 6 1 2010 6 6 .. 34 13 ft .. 216 9 1 2643 11 0 42120 19 6 .. 1203 18 6 2589 0 0 •• •• .. .. 497 2 3 .. 1370 5 10 940 6 0 16061 7 e 746 10 9 2051 13 4 38610 1 5 .. (10) 1476S 19 0 (9) Sewers Rate 172 11 11 2140 15 6 .. .. 667 7 7 .. 54 0 9 5 7 2873 9 5 .. 11635 5 6 .. •• 151 11 •• 846 8 7 354 10 4 340 15 6 630 16 4 .. 141 8 1 235 1 6 .. 65 14 0 86 5 6 2701 0 0 345 1 4 .. Lighting Rate 1421 8 11 4346 2 10 .. .. .. .. 0 13 6 4346 16 4 .. .. .. •• •• •• •• .. .. .. 3892 8 10 .. .. .. .. .. 3892 8 10 1875 16 5 .. New Roads, &c., Account 365 9 9 •• .. .. 6068 13 7 .. .. 6068 13 7 4794 8 7 .. .. •• :: •• •• •• •• .. .. •• •• •• •• •• 4794 8 7 908 15 3 .. 1594 0 10 14701 18 0 43703 4 6 2010 6 6 .. 692 0 7 6068 13 7 270 3 8 2665 10 1 55409 18 10 4794 8 7 11635 5 6 1203 18 6 2,189 0 0 1514 11 9 84 8 7 35 10 4 340 15 6 1127 18 7 389 8 10 1511 13 11 1175 7 6 16061 7 6 812 4 9 2137 19 0 49997 18 10 3129 13 0 14769 19 0 £ 8686 16 5 44807 6 6 164842 19 2 6479 8 7 42 12 0 2830 5 8 23591 11 7 1038 10 5 13902 16 — 2 212728 3 7 21616 19 9 46419 1 11 3310 3 11 962 13 1 7027 12 9 19 2 4 1751 14 7 956 0 10 1476 2 10 6372 16 4 1348 19 11 6779 3 1 4517 17 5 61807 14 10 §2377 15 10 6281 3 9 193859 3 2 12561 1 1 38862 9 11 Loans • • .. .. .. •• .. 7450 0 0 .. 8482 3 7 1550 0 0 •• 3 0 4 •• •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 6648 15 3 9049 19 2 Add Loan Fand Account 25/3/96 See "A" 70296 0 0 34175 9 11 Repayment of Loans See "B" 12130 6 8 65615 13 4 Add Loan Fund a/c 25/3/97. See "C" 215039 9 0 78176 14 5 Deduct Balances against Deduct amount of balances against 78982 16 5 39314 4 6 38862 9 11 44807 6 6 39314 1 6 Net Balance in Cash 25/3m Net Balance in Cash 25/3/96 34175 9 11 254353 13 6 254353 13 6 ACCOUNT OF LOANS. Balances owing by Board on 25 th March, 1896. , Amounts paid off in year ended 25th March. 1897. Balances owing >y Board on 25th March, 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ ». d. Atlas Assurance Compan £25,000 Loan No. 10 (11) 833 6 8 833 6 8 .. Ditto ditto £10,000 ,, ,, 11 (12) 333 6 8 333 6 8 .. Ditto ditto £18,000 ,, ,, 13 (13) 600 0 0 600 0 0 .. Ditto ditto £8,000 ,, ,, 14 (14) 266 13 4 266 13 4 .. Customs Fund Office £42,000 ,, ,, 16 (15) 2833 6 8 1416 13 4 1416 13 4 Ditto ditto £2,000 ,, ,, 17 (16) 133 6 8 66 13 4 66 13 4 Clergy Mutual Assuranci Society £24,000 ,, ,, 19 (17) 1600 0 0 800 0 0 800 0 0 Ditto ditto £20 000 ,, ,, 20 (18) 2000 0 o 666 13 4 1333 6 8 London County Council £23,600 ,, ,, 21 (19) 1200 0 0 120 0 0 1080 0 0 Ditto ditto £1 400 ,, ,, 22 (2 0) 507 0 0 47 0 0 460 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,500 ,, ,, 25 (21) 750 0 0 50 0 0 700 0 0 Ditto ditto £3,000 ,, ,, 26 (22) 1500 0 0 100 0 0 1400 0 0 Ditto ditto £3,000 ,, ,, 29 (23) 2324 0 0 52 0 0 2272 0 0 Ditto ditto £1 000 ,, ,, 30 (24) 694 0 0 33 0 0 561 0 0 Ditto ditto £7 000 ,, ,, 31 (25) 2800 0 0 350 0 0 2450 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,800 ,, ,, 33 (26) 2205 0 0 49 0 0 2156 0 0 Ditto ditto £700 ,, ,, 34 (27) 315 0 0 35 0 0 280 0 0 Ditto ditto £750 ,, ,, 35 (28) 475 0 0 25 0 0 450 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,500 ,, ,, 41 (29) 1169 0 0 167 0 0 1002 0 0 Ditto ditto £7,000 ,, ,, 42 (30) 4550 0 0 350 0 0 4200 0 0 Ditto ditto £4,400 ,, ,, 43 (31) 3371 0 0 147 0 0 3224 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,000 ,, ,, 45 (32) 1400 0 0 100 0 0 1300 0 0 Ditto ditto £3,000 ,, ,, 46 (33) 2640 0 0 60 0 0 2580 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,500 ,, ,, 48 (34) 1665 0 0 167 0 0 1498 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,000 ,, ,, 50 (35) 200 0 0 200 0 0 .. Ditto ditto £3,500 ,, ,, 51 (36) 3200 0 0 100 0 0 3100 0 0 Ditto ditto £5,000 ,, ,, 52 (37) 1000 0 0 1000 0 0 .. Ditto ditto £1,300 ,, ,, 53 (3 8) 520 0 0 260 0 0 260 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,500 ,, ,, 64 (3 9) 2002 0 0 166 0 0 1836 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,200 ,, ,, 65 (40) 1020 0 0 60 0 0 960 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,200 ,, ,, 56 (41) 1050 0 0 50 0 0 1000 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,000 ,, ,, 57 (42) 400 0 0 200 0 0 200 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,600 ,, ,, 58 (43) 1560 0 0 520 0 0 1040 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,000 ,, ,, 59 (44) 866 0 0 67 0 0 799 0 0 Ditto ditto £5,000 ,, ,, 60 (4 5) 3750 0 0 625 0 0 3125 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,700 ,, ,, 61 (46) 2314 0 0 386 0 0 1928 0 0 Ditto ditto £2.100 ,, ,, 62 (47) 1960 0 0 70 0 0 1890 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,500 ,, ,, 63 (4 8) 2406 0 0 94 0 0 2312 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,000 ,, ,, 64 (49) 950 0 0 50 0 0 900 0 0 Ditto ditto £3,600 ,, ,, 65 (5 0) 3533 0 0 67 0 0 3466 0 0 Ditto ditto £7,000 ,, ,, 66 (5 1) 6000 0 0 1000 0 0 5000 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,500 ,, ,, 67 (5 2) 1500 0 0 29 0 0 1471 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,500 ,, ,, 68 (5 3) .. 300 0 0 1200 0 0 Ditto ditto £1,550 ,, ,, 69 (5 4) .. .. 1550 0 0 Ditto ditto £1.800 ,, ,, 70 (3 5) .. .. 1800 0 0 Ditto ditto £500 ,, ,, 71 (S 6) .. 10 0 0 490 0 0 Ditto ditto £2,100 ,, ,, 72 (5 7) •• 41 0 0 2059 0 0 TOTALS £248,800 70296 "A" 0 0 12130 "B" 6 8 65615 "C" 13 >» 4 (1) The amount of loan as against this balance is £11,342 14s. lOd. \ (2) The amount of loan as against this balance is £1,732 18*. Sid. \ (3) The amount of loan as against this balance is £9,086 lis. 8ii. j (4) The amount of loan aa against this balance is £2,862 14s. Id. I (5) The amount of loan as against this balance is £12,631 7s, Od. ( (6) The amount of loan as against this balance is £2,580 0*. Id. } ^65,615 13a. id. (7) The amount of loan in addition to this balance is £82 10s. Id. I (8) The amount of loan in addition to this balance is £87 5s. 10d. l (9) The amount of loan as against this balance is £24,055 16s. id. 1 (10) The amount of loan in addition to this balance is £1,153 14d. It. J (11) This loan was negotiated in May, 1866, at 5 per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Clapham, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Clapham, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments. The loan has now been paid off. (12) I h*s loan was negociated in May, 1866, at 5 per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing nuw Sewers in Putney, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Putney, to be repaid by 30 equal annual inatalments. The loan has now been paid oS\ (13) 1 his loan was negociated in December, 1866, at 5 per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Wandsworth, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Wandsworth, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments. The loan has now been paid off. (14) This loan was negociated in December, 1866, at 5 per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructirg new .lewers in Putney, upon security of the Seweis Rates in Putney, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments. The loan has now been paid off. (15) This loan was negociated in May, 1867, at 4$ per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Streatham, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Streatham, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments; £41,083 6s. 8d. has been paid off. (16) This loan was negociated in May, 1867, at 4g per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Tooting, upon security of the Sewers Rates in 'looting, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments; £1,933 6s. 8d. has been paid off. (17) This loan was negociated in October, 1867, at 4J per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Clapham, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Clapham, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments; £23,200 has been paid off. (18) This loan was negociated in June, 1868, at 4j per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Putney, upon security of the Sewers Kates in Putney, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments; £18,666 13s. Id. has been paid off. (1 9) This loan was obtained in April, 18«6, at £3 18s. 6d. per cent, interest, for the purchase of Frogmore Wharf, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments; £2,520 has been paid off. (20) This loan was obtained in December, 1876, at 3f per cent, interest, to complete the purchase of Frogmore Wharf, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments: £940 has been paid off. (2 1) This loan was obtained in December, 1880, at 4 per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing a new Sewer in Atkins Road, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments; £800 has been paid off. (22) This loan was obtained in March, 1881, at 4 per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing a new Sewer at Roehamptoa, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalments; £1,600 has been paid off. (23) This loan was obtained in December, 1883, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses ot widening Wandsworth Lane (Putney Bridge Road), at its junction with High Street, 1 utney, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 58 annual instalments; £728 has been paid off. (24) This loan was obtained in December, 1883, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of widening High Street and Red Lion Street, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be lepaid by 30 anuual instalments ; £439 has been paid off. (25) This loan was obtained in December, 1883, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of Paving Works in Wandsworth Road and High Street, Ch»pham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 annual instalments ; £4,550 has been paid off. (26) This loan was obtained in July, 1884, at £3 10s. per cent, inteiest, for the purchase of the Parish Yard, Wandsworth Road, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 57 annual instalments; £644 has been paid off. (27) This loan was obtained in July, 1884, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to delray expenses of erecting buildings in the Parish Yard, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 annual instalments; £420 has been paid off. (28) This loan was obtained in March, 1885, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray contribution (one moiety) towards cost of widening London and South Western Railway Bridge over Garratt Lane, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments; £300 has been naid off. (29)This loan was obtained in March, 1888, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of embanking the towing path of the River Thames at Putney, and constructing a footway and carriage load thereon upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 15 annual instalments; £1,498 has been paid off. (30 ) This loan was obtained in ilay, 1888, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray cost of purchase of land and erection of new offices for the Board, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 equal annual instalments; £2,800 has been paid off. ' v 3 lu (31) This loan was obtained in July, 1888, to defray contribution (one moiety) towards cost of widening London and South Western Railway Bridges over North Street, Birdhurst Road, Wandsworth Lane (Putney Bridge Road), Point Pleasant, and York Road, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments; £1,176 has been paid off. (3 2) This loan was obtained in October 1889, at £3 10s per cent. interest, to defray expenses of widening High Street and South Street, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 equal annual instalments ; £700 has been paid off. ' (3 3) This loan was obtained in April, 1890, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, for the purchase of a wharf at Bell Lane, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 50 equal annual instalments; £420 has been paid off. .umwm.1, io De (34) This loan was obtained in December, 1890, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of constructing a dock, wharf, and bridge at the mouth of the Beverley Brook Putney, upon secunty ot the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 15 annual instalments ; £1,002 has been paid off eveney crooK, (35) This loan was obtained jn June, 1892, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving Works in High Street, Tooting, upon security of the Rates in the District. The loan has now been paid off. (36) This loan was obtained in July, 1892, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray cost of purchase of Parish Yard and Offices, Streatham High Road, upon security of the Rates in the District; £400 has been paid off. (37) This loan was obtained in June, 1892, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving and Kerbing Works at Clapham Common, South Side, upon security of the Rates in the District. The loan has now been paid off (38) This loan was obtained in July, 1892, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood and York Stone Paving and Kerbing Works in High Street, Wandsworth, upon secturiy of the Rathes in the District; £1040 has been paid off. (39) This loan was obtained in November, 1892, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defery expenses of erection of Stabling and obther buildings on the Parish Wharf, Putney, upon the security of the Rates in the Distrit; £664 has been paid off. (40) This loan was obtained in February, 1893, at £10s. per cent. interest, to defray cost of Sewerage Works in several streets in Wandsworth upon the security of the Rates in the District; £240 has been paid off. (41) This loan was obtained in March, 1893, at £3 10s. per cent. interest to defray cost of the purchase of property for widening The Chase, Clapham, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £200 has been paid off. (42) This loan was obtained in May, 1893, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving and Kerbing Works at Clapham Common, South Side, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £800 has been paid off. The total expenditure on Horses, &c. Account was, in Clapham £1,329 6s. 6d., distributed among the following Accounts, viz.:—Highways, Dusting, Watering, Private Works, and Sewers Construction, Repairs, and Cleansing; and in Putnev £906 13s 10d., distributed among the following Accounts, viz.:— Highways, Improvements, Dustiog, Watering, Private Works and Sewers Cleansing. * Including the sum of £236 7s. 5d. for paving footpaths at Streatham Hill and Streatham High Road. t Including the sum of £1,968 6s. Id. for widening Streatham Hill and Streatham High Road, and expenses incidental thereto in connection with the extension of the tramways from Telford Avenue to the Tate Public Library. This sum was paid by the London Tramways Company. + Including the sum of £150 Is. 3d. for interest on loan raised for purchase of land and erection of new offices. § Exclusive of the sum of £150 Is. 3d. for interest on offices loan, included in Establishment charges. || Including the sums of £2,000, and £2,144 8s. lOd. for purchase of land for slop sho its at Ashlone Road, Putney, and Southfields, Wandsworth, respectively, and thesum of £1,800 for the construction of a river wall at the Feathers Wharf, Wandsworth. ACCOUNT OF LOANS, SHOWING AMOUNT OWING, &c. BY EACH PARISH. PARISH. Amounts owing 25th March, 189Ii. Amounts paid off in year ended 25th March, 1897. Amounts owing 25th March, 1897. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. CLAPHAM 14703 6 8 4292 6 8 11911 0 0 PUTNEY 12760 0 0 1957 13 4 11302 6 8 STREATHAM 15297 6 8 2952 13 4 13894 13 4 TOOTING 333 6 8 266 13 4 66 13 4 WANDSWORTH 22652 0 0 2311 0 0 24241 0 0 DISTRICT (Offices Loan) 4550 0 0 350 0 0 4200 0 0 Totals 70296 0 0 12130 6 8 65615 13 4 (43) This loan was obtained in October, 1893, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving Works in High Street, Wandsworth, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £1,560 has been paid off. (44) This loan was obtained in December, 1893, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Footpaving and Channelling Works in several streets in Wandsworth, upon the security of the Kates in the District; £201 has been paid off. (45) This loan was obtained in May, 1894, at £3 10s. per cent interest, to defray expenses of erection of Stabling and other buildings at the Parish \ard, Clapham, and the purchase of Horses, Carts, and other Plant, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £1,875 has been paid off. (46) This loan was obtained in July, 1894, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving Works in Streatham High Road, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £772 has been paid off. (47) This loan was obtained in July, 1894, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray cost of purchase of The Feathers Wharf, Wandsworth, upon the security of the Rates in the Districf; £210 has been paid off. (48) This loan was obtained in November, 1894, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of erecting, fitting up, and furnishing the Wandsworth Surveyor's offices, upon the security of the Rates in the Dis'.rict; £188 has been paid off. (49) This loan was obtained in March, 1895, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of re-constructing sewer in Streatham High Road and compensation to Lambeth Vestry for draining into sewer in Brixton Hill, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £100 has been paid off. (50) This loan was obtained in May, 1895, at £3 5s. per cent. interest, to defray cost of purchase of land for slop-shoot at Southfields, Wandsworth, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £134 has been paid off. (51) This loan was obtained in June, 1895, at £3 5s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving Works in Streatham High Road, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £ 2,000 has been paid off. (52) This loan was obtained in February, 1896, at £3 per cent. interest, to defray cost of purchase of land for slop-shoot at Ashlone Road, Putney, upon the security of the Rates in the District; £29 has been paid off. (53) This loan was obtained in April, 1896, at £3 per cent. interest, to defray cost of purchase of land for widening Park Place, Clapham, furnishing the Clapham Surveyor s Offices, and providing stablin* accommodation, horses and harness, at the Parish Yard, Clapham, upon the security of the Ritis in the District; £500 has been paid off. (54) This loan was obtained in May, 1896, at £3 per cent. interest, to defray coatribuuon (one-third) towards cost of widening railway bridges iu Boundaries Itiad, Bjdford Hill, Tooting Bee Koad, and Miteham Lane, Streatham, upon the security of the Rates in the District. (55) This loan was obt lined in July, 1896, at £3 per cent. interest, to defray expeasas of constructing a river wall at the Feathers Whacf, Waadsworth, upon the security ot the Rates in the District. (56) This loan was obtained in October, 1896, at £3 per cent. interest, to complete purchase of lani for slop shoot at Ashlone Road, 1 utney, upon the security of the ltates in the District; £10 has been paid off. (5 7) This loan was obtained in December, 1893, at £3 per cent. interest, to defray cost of purchne of land for slop sh >ot at Sjutlihel Is, W andsworth, upon the security of the Kates in the District; £41 has been paid off. t L 6W.BcLCMv&Co.Lt&. 127, Strand LotlcLoro WAN 3 APPENDIX B. Sanitarn Department. REPORT ON THE Health and Sanitarn Condition OF THE SEVERAL PARISHES COMPRISED IN THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT DURING THE YEAR 1896 BY THE EDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH TOGETHER WITH THE Report of the public Analnst. ) To the Board of Works for the Wandsworth District. Gentlemen, We have the honour to present our Annual Report on the Health, Sanitary Condition, and Vital Statistics of the Wandsworth District, for the year 1896. The mortality rates compare favourably with those of recent years and generally the following statement shows that the health of the district has maintained its high level, and that a large amount of important sanitary work has been performed. We liave the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servants, The Medical Officers of Health for the Wandsworth District. E 2 REPORT on the HEALTH AND SANITARY CONDITION OE THE ENTIRE DISTRICT, 1896. population. The Census taken in April, 1896, showed a population for the District of 187,264, an increase of 30,333 since the Census of 1891. The population has not, therefore, increased so rapidly during this five years as it had been doing during the decade ending 1891. Had that been so the population in 1896 would have been 193,545. The population estimated to the middle of the year was 189,675. Census, 1881. Census, 1891. Census, 1896. Middle of 1896 Clapham 36,380 43,698 46,953 47,122 Putney 13,235 17,771 20,566 20,566 Streatham 21,611 42,958 54,338 55,907 Tooting 3,942 5,784 7,306 7,382 Wandsworth. 28,004 46,720 58,101 58,698 Entire Dist. 103,172 156,931 187,264 189,675 Births. The total number registered during the year was 4,833, of which 2,426 were males and 2,407 females. They were distributed in the sub-districts as follows: — 6 TABLE I. BIRTHS. RATES. Sub-Districts. Males. Females. Total. Birth-rate. Rate of Natural Increase. Clapham 586 558 1144 24.27 11.24 Putney 241 227 468 22.7 10.5 Streatham 620 657 1277 22.8 11.8 Tooting 102 88 190 25.7 11.5 Wandsworth 877 877 1754 31.41 18.06 Whole District 2426 2407 4833 25.48 11.19 The birth-rate was 25.48, compared with 26.01 in the previous year. The mean rate for the last ten years was 27.82. The rate has, therefore, fallen again, and with exception of that of 1894, is the lowest of the decade. The birth-rate for London was 30.2, the lowest on record also. The natural increment of the population, by excess of births over deaths, was 2097, giving a rate of 11.19 per thousand living. Deaths. The total number was 2,736, consisting of 1,328 males and 1,408 females, compared with 2,389 in the previous year. The deaths of inhabitants from other parts of London that occurred in hospitals and institutions in the district, 499 in number, should be excluded, and those properly belonging to this population which happened outside its borders should be added viz., 471. The corrected total is therefore 2,703. The death-rate calculated from this figure was 14.29, and without such correction 14.42. The following Table shows the distribution in the sub districts :— Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. District. 7 TABLE II. DEATHS. Uncorrected Death-rate. Corrected Death-rate. Sub-Districts. Males. Females. Total. Clapham 299 317 616 13.07 14.94 Putney 122 130 252 12.2 13.6 Streatham 297 320 617 11.0 12.0 Tooting 171 194 365 49.4 14.2 Waadsworth 439 447 886 14.82 16.94 Whole District 1328 1408 2736 14.42 14.29 The following Table shows the rates for the last 10 years :— TABLE III. Birth-rates, Death-rates, and rates of Natural Increase in the entire district during the ten years 1886-95 inclusive. Years. Birth-rate per 1000. Death-rate per 1000. Rate of Natural Increase. 1886 30.8 14.5 16.3 1887 30.4 13.3 17.1 1888 29.5 13.4 16.1 1889 27.5 11.6 15.8 1890 27.01 14.58 12.43 1891 28.52 13.1 15.4 1892 26.23 13.4 11.53 1893 27.1 12.8 13.0 1894 25.17 12.6 12.57 1895 26.01 14.48 11.58 Mean of Ten Years 27.82 13.37 14.18 1896 25.48 14.29 11.19 8 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The death-rate was therefore 92 above the decennial average, and, while lower than that of 1895, is higher than any other year since 1890. The Outlying Deaths above referred to are shown in the following Table, and are arranged according to the respective sub-districts to which they belong, and the institutions in which they have occurred. TABLE IV. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. CAUSES OF DEATH. Number in Entire District. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting Wandsworth. Union Infirmary. General and Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 18 2 1 2 I 12 .. .. 18 Diphteria 14 3 2 5 .. 4 1 3 10 Membranous-Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 3 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. Choleia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 4 .. .. 1 1 2 2 2 .. Measles 9 .. .. 3 .. 6 7 .. 2 Whooping Cough 3 1 .. .. .. 2 2 1 .. Influenza 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. Diarrhœa 11 .. .. 2 .. 9 10 1 .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tubercular 45 18 .. 9 .. 18 25 19 1 Cancer 10 9 1 .. .. .. 2 8 .. Rheumatism 3 1 .. 1 .. 1 1 2 .. Respiratory Diseases 57 18 5 4 1 29 27 26 4 Circulatory Diseases 72 22 7 14 .. 26 49 21 2 Nervous Diseases 11 8 3 .. .. .. 7 4 .. Other Diseases 82 19 14 45 13 91 88 92 2 Violence 24 9 3 7 2 3 4 20 .. Age 3 3 .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. Total 471 115 36 93 22 205 229 200 42 Corresponding Totals in preceding year 445 117 51 73 13 191 237 177 31 They numbered altogether 471, and of these 229 took place in the Union Infirmary, 200 in the general and special District, 9 hospitals of London, and 42 in those of the Metropolitan Asylums' Board. The relative proportions in the sub-districts is as follows:— 1895. 1896. Clapham 2.4 per thousand living. 2.3 per thousand living. Putney 2.6 ,, ,, ,, 1.7 ,, ,, ,, Streatham 1.4,, ,, ,, 1.6 ,, ,, ,, Tooting ^'2 tt a >> 2.9 ,, ,, ,, Wandsworth 3.5 ,, ,, ,, 3.4 ,, ,, ,, The next Table gives interesting information as to the density of population, and the relative mortality of the industrial and other classes in each sub-district:— > TABLE V. Sub-District. Population, 1896. Percentage of Total Population. Number of persons to 1 acre. Relative mortality of Industrial and other classes. Industrial classes. Other classes. Clapham 47,122 24.9 38.2 60.3 39.7 Putn6y 20,566 10.8 9.4 63.1 36.9 Streatham 55,907 29.5 19.2 75.0 25.0 Tooting 7,382 3.9 13.1 51.2 48.8 Wandsworth 58,698 30.9 24.1 68.5 31.5 Table VI. gives the deaths occurring in the entire district during 1896, classified according to sex, age, and social position, the relative numbers in each sub-district being also given. 10 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. TABLE VI. POPULATION Census 1891 156,931 Estimated Population in middle of 1896, 189,675 Total Deaths from each Class of Disease, &c., in the District. Sub-Districts. Sex. Age. Social Positiion. Clapham—Population, 47,122 Area in acres, 1,233 Putney—Population, 20,566 Area in acres, 2,176 Streatham—Population, 55,907 Area in acres, 2.904 Tooting—Population, 7,382 Area in acres, 561 Wandsworth —Population, 58,698 Area in acres, 2,433 Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 to 45 years. From 45 to 65 years. From 65 to 76 years. 75 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen. Clerks, &c. Industrial and Labouring Classes. CAUSES OF DEATH I. Zymotic. Small Pox ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Scarlet Fever 9 4 ... 2 ... 3 1 8 2 4 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 7 Diphtheria 25 9 2 6 ... 8 12 13 1 13 9 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 3 6 16 MembranousCroup 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Typhus Fever ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Enteric Fever 14 "3 4 "3 "4 11 "3 "*1 5 "7 "l 1 3 5 5 Continued Fever... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Relapsing Fever... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Puerperal Fever ... 3 l ... 1 ... l ... 3 ... ... ... l 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Cholera 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 Erysipelas 6 3 ... ... ... 3 2 4 2 ... ... 1 ... 2 l ... ... ... 2 4 Measles 145 35 21 26 5 58 67 78 31 106 8 ... ... ... ... ... 2 12 131 Whooping Cough 152 41 17 35 6 53 68 84 61 86 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 22 127 Influenza 36 12 4 12 2 6 13 23 4 ... 1 3 8 6 9 5 ... 2 7 27 Diarrhoea and Dysentery 108 32 6 21 5 44 56 52 94 9 ... ... 1 2 ... 2 ... 3 17 88 Hydrophobia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Other Zymotic Diseases ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Totals of Zymotic Class 500 140 54 106 19 181 230 270 195 219 27 10 21 11 10 7 1 16 75 408 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 26 5 ... 10 ... 11 13 13 ... 2 2 1 10 3 7 1 1 2 7 16 Cancer and other Tumours 154 42 12 50 7 18 48 106 ... 2 3 1 18 69 44 17 13 12 43 86 Other Constitutional Diseases 26 7 4 1 1 13 12 14 7 3 ... 2 4 5 5 ... ... 2 12 12 Tubercular. Phthisis Other Tuber- 168 54 16 30 10 58 98 70 2 3 5 39 80 32 4 3 4 10 45 109 cular Diseases 77 24 7 13 2 31 33 11 29 26 13 4 3 2 ... ... 2 ... 24 51 III. Local. Nervous 232 57 28 60 3 84 130 102 49 12 8 7 46 57 24 29 13 18 62 139 Circulatory 271 72 25 69 16 89 134 137 4 6 10 14 34 94 64 45 16 24 87 144 Respiratory 369 89 42 103 13 122 192 177 111 64 7 8 18 53 47 61 17 16 79 257 Digestive 159 24 31 24 8 72 67 98 72 13 4 4 17 28 15 6 3 9 44 103 Urinary 68 16 6 23 2 21 39 28 1 1 2 14 26 11 13 8 4 24 32 Generative 22 7 1 6 ... 8 ... 22 ... ... ... 2 19 1 ... ... 1 3 3 15 Locomotory 3 1 ... 2 ... ... 1 2 l 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 Integumentary ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 iv. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 183 50 9 56 3 65 99 84 182 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 37 141 Congenital Defects 6 ... ... ... ... 6 4 2 6... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 5 Old Age 125 14 8 47 4 52 54 71 ... ... ... ... ... 3 29 96 7 11 28 79 V. Violence 66 14 8 17 1 29 48 21 17 5 ... 7 16 16 7 2 11 53 VI Ill-defined 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Not Specified ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Totals 2460 616 252 617 89 886 1202 1258 678 357 80 101 301 399 267 277 87 131 583 1659 District. 11 Ages at Death. Of the total deaths, 27.5 per cent, were of infants under 1 year of age, and 22.1 of persons above the age of 65 years. Infantile Death rate. This rate was as follows :— Whole District 140 per 1000 births. Clapham 138 „ „ Putney 151 ,, „ Streatham 137 ,, „ Tooting 115 ,, „ Wandsworth 143 „ „ Registration London 161 ,, „ The rate last year was 127 per 1000. 12 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Zymotic Diseases. The following Table shows the deaths from zymotic diseases that have occurred among the population of the entire district in each of the last ten years, including those in outlying institutions. TABLE VII. 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Small Pox .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. Scarlet Fever 22 31 11 9 7 29 51 19 15 27 Diphtheria 21 66 42 20 30 57 99 74 37 39 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. 10 17 13 9 1 Typhus 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 12 18 11 21 10 12 18 21 26 17 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. 2 2 1 1 .. .. Puerperal Fever 2 6 3 8 6 7 8 13 7 4 Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Erysipelas 11 5 5 5 6 16 16 14 5 10 Measles 68 56 33 88 78 82 33 82 27 154 Whooping Cough 44 96 43 100 76 89 77 54 24 155 Influenza .. .. .. 21 61 123 64 45 131 37 Diarrhoea and Dysentery 70 64 41 73 51 83 124 59 110 119 Other Zymotic Diseases 10 2 14 3 18 3 2 6 1 .. Totals 261 34.5 204 348 345 513 511 401 394 564 The number of deaths was 564, and is seen to be the largest of the ten years. It may be pointed out here, however, how large a proportion of the total is made up of Measles and Whooping cough—no less than 56.5 per cent.—and also how much the number of deaths from these two causes exceeds those of other years. That must also be borne in mind in considering the next table, which gives the corrected zymotic death-rate for the last nine years in each sub-district and in the whole district. 13 District. TABLE VIII. 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Clapham 2.33 1.67 1.7 2.2 2.99 3.3 2.4 2.83 3.14 Putney 1.12 .85 1.2 1.4 2.2 3.4 1.6 1.8 2.7 Streatham .. 1.95 .97 1.9 2.2 2.5 1.9 1.6 1.8 2.1 Tooting • • 2.5 1.9 2.0 2.6 7.1 5.9 2.7 2.8 Wandsworth 3.97 1.52 3.4 2.3 4.2 3.3 2.64 2.03 3.96 Whole | District) 2.48 1.4 2.5 2.2 3.1 3.05 2.28 2.1 2.97 The death-rate is 2.97. It shows a rise on the two previous years, but is less than 1892 or 1893. TABLE IX. Number of Notifications received during the year. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. Whole District. Small Pox l . . . . . . 1 Scarlatina 221 83 248 31 400 983 Diphtheria 68 49 60 11 98 286 Membranous Croup . . 1 . . . . 2 3 Typhus Fevers. . . . . . . . . . . . . Enteric 31 15 27 3 22 98 Continued 1 3 2 2 . . 8 Relapsing . . . . . . . . . . . . Puerperal 1 1 1 . . 7 10 Cholera . . . . . . 1 . . 1 Erysipelas 75 12 47 12 116 262 Totals 398 164 385 60 645 1652 14 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Number of Notifications received each year since the passing of the Notification of Infectious Diseases Act:— 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Small Pox . . 4 . . 29 1 15 1 Scarlatina 309 453 887 1256 673 659 983 Diphtheria 112 164 242 398 321 266 286 Membranous Croup 4 8 17 33 22 21 3 Typhus Fevers. . . 1 . . . . . . . . . . Enteric 77 64 86 108 128 138 98 Continued 5 2 11 6 13 2 8 Relapsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Puerperal 9 10 13 21 19 6 10 Cholera . . . . . . . . 1 2 1 Erysipelas 147 177 274 373 243 221 262 The above two tables give the number of Notifications received under the Public Health (London) Act distributed in sub-districts, and the numbers for each year. Small Pox. There has been no Small Pox at all during the year, for the one notification referred to a case which was not Small Pox as mentioned in the Clapham Report. Scarlet Fever. There were 29 deaths during the year, more than in either of the preceding years. Scarlet Fever showed epidemic prevalence in 1896, after a lull of two years. The cases notified numbered 983, less than in the last epidemic year 1893, when they numbered 1,256. The appended chart shows the number notified in each month of the year, and it shows the maximum prevalence to have been in October, when 160 cases were notified. There was a steady rise from June, 62 cases, to October, broken, however, by the August fall. The number removed to hospital was 568 or 55.5 per cent of all the cases. There was again considerable want of hospital accommodation experienced during the autumn months, especially CHART showing the number of notifications of SCARLET FEVER. PI PHTHER1A and ENTERIC FEVER received in the entire District during each month o7 the year 1836 15 District. in October. It was often impossible to obtain the admission of patients for a week or more after application had been made, but the Metropolitan Asylums Board minimised it as much as possible by removing first those cases marked as urgent by Medical Officers of Health. Still it is clear that there is not sufficient provision of hospital beds to take in all those who desire admission during time of epidemic. It is a question whether it is right that the class of people, very much above the poor or artizans, who now largely fill the beds, should be entitled to free nursing and medical treatment at the expense of the ratepayers. Though it is probably on the whole to the advantage of the public, in the limitation of infectious diseases, it must entail even yet a vast increase of expenditure to do it thoroughly. It is of interest to note that the mortality was only 3.1 per cent, in those removed, presumably the worst cases, and 2.1 in those remaining at home. Diphtheria and Membranous Croup. The deaths were 39 from Diphtheria and 1 from Membranous Croup. Taking them together there was a fall on the previous year, when the deaths were 46, and the number is smaller than in any year since 1891. There were 286 Diphtheria and 3 Membranous Croup notified, practically the same as the previous year, but materially less than in 1893 and 1894. The chart shows the monthly distribution, and reference to it indicates that there were many more cases in October than in any other month. The correspondence of the curve with that of Scarlet Fever is interesting and has been as marked in previous years, though the increase of Scarlet Fever in 1896 over 1895 does not obtain in Diphtheria; if the relationship between them were constant we should expect in an epidemic year for Scarlet Fever to have an excess of Diphtheria. The death-rate per thousand living was equal to .21 and in Registration-London .59. In the adjacent parishes of Lambeth and Battersea, it was respectively 0.46 and 0.49. 16 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Enteric Fever. The deaths were 17, as against 26 in the previous year and were less than in any year since 1892. There were 98 cases reported, also materially less than in the three previous years. There were also 8 cases of Continued Fever notified. The death-rate per thousand living was 0.089 whilst in Registration-London it was 0.14. Puerperal Fever. Was the cause of 4 deaths, the smallest number since 1889. There were 10 notifications of cases, as against 6 in 1895. Cholera. One case was notified in the Tooting subdistrict, but turned out to be not Asiatic Cholera. Erysipelas. Caused 10 deaths and there were 262 notifications, many of which were of cases of an exceedingly trival character. Measles. The deaths from this cause were no less than 154, equal to a rate of 0'81 per thousand living. The disease was very prevalent in 1896 and the number of deaths was the highest in any year since the separation of Battersea ; it is referred to in detail in the local reports. We again point out, as in our report for 1895, the importance of something being done to stop this excessive mortality. It is largely a matter of educating the poor as to the necessity of taking care oi Measles. This we hold could be to some extent accomplished if we knew of cases of Measles, at present we only hear of deaths. A special report on the notification of Measles appeared in our report for 1895. All the deaths but 8 were of children under 5 years of age. It may be pointed out that the Registrar General's Annual Summary shows that the deaths from this disease 17 District. were 938 in excess of the average annual number of deaths for the last 10 years in London. The only other Zymotic diseases that showed excess over the decennial average were Whooping Cough, Diphtheria and Diarrhœa. It is stated, in the same report, to have been more fatal in 1896 than in any year on record with the exception of 1864. Whooping Cough. Caused 155 deaths, again the largest number in recent years There is usually found this correspondence between it and Measles, the secondary cause of death is usually the same, viz: lung disease. Influenza. There were only 37 deaths attributed to this cause the smallest number since it has become epidemic. It is satisfactory and gives ground for hope that we may again be reaching a period of freedom from this disease. Diarrhœa. There were 119 deaths, an increase on the two previous years. The number of deaths is found, as usual, to vary with the character of the summer weather. Deaths from Non-Zymotic Diseases. 1887. 1888. 1889 1890. 1891. 1892. 1893. 1894. 1895. 1896 Gout and Rheumatism 26 18 14 33 16 21 20 26 11 26 Cancer and other Tumours 78 70 68 89 103 101 90 115 118 154 Other constitutional diseases 18 12 15 38 21 25 23 16 16 26 Tubercular 268 257 219 265 246 256 228 234 256 245 Nervous 292 298 282 294 287 302 295 246 308 232 Circulatory 142 160 146 150 180 185 179 172 206 271 Respiratory 330 357 302 473 510 453 488 340 486 369 Digestive 119 119 107 123 149 131 157 149 144 159 Urinary 52 50 50 50 55 79 69 61 65 68 Generative 4 7 14 18 12 21 18 12 13 22 Locomotory 1 . . 3 3 4 8 2 1 1 3 Integumentary 1 4 . . 1 1 I 1 . . . . 1 Premature Births, Low Vitality, and Malformation 144 156 149 174 170 183 215 164 218 189 Old Age 97 96 103 104 95 95 114 114 128 125 Violence 39 48 48 66 54 61 59 66 70 69 Ill-defined and not specified 4 8 9 10 10 13 13 6 1 1 Totals 1615 1660 1529 1891 1913 1935 1971 1722 2041 1960 C 18 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Cancer and other Tumours. Under this head there is an increase, the number being quite the largest of recent years. There has been a tendency for an increase under this heading since 1890. In registration-London the deaths from this cause exceeded the decennial average by 483 so that, the increase applies to the whole Metropolis Tubercular Diseases. Under this heading, which includes consumption, there is a slight fall from 1895, but the number of deaths, 245, is very little below the average. This group of diseases we hope to influence by improved sanitation, but on the other hand it is largely affected by the density of population. As year by year the district becomes more built over there will be a tendency for tubercular diseases to increase, hence the effect of sanitary administration may not be so directly apparent. Nervous Diseases. Under this head there were fewer deaths than in any recent year—232 only. Circulatory Diseases. The number of deaths from this cause 271, on the other hand, showed an increase, not a very considerable one, however. Respiratory Diseases. There were fewer deaths from diseases of the lungs. Excepting in 1894, when the number was just below, they were fewer than in any year since 1889. Premature Births, etc., etc. There were 189 deaths, a marked fall on 1895. Old Age. The deaths attributed to this were 125, and the number does not vary much from recent years. Violence. There were 69 deaths attributed to violence. The number from this cause has remained remarkably stationary during the last few years Inquests. The next table gives particulars of the Inquests held during the year. They were 152 in number. The verdicts were—from natural causes 81, accident 48, suicide 14, homicide 5, open verdicts 4. 19 TABLE X. INQUESTS. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. Totals. Death from Natural Causes: 20 8 9 1 43 81 Accidental: Crushed or knocked down in street 2 .. .. .. .. 2 Burns 3 .. .. .. 2 5 Suffocation 2 1 4 .. 6 13 Shock and hæmorrhage from ulcerating pessary 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Palls 1 .. 5 1 2 9 Fractured thigh 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Drowning .. 1 .. .. 3 4 Fracture of skull .. 1 .. .. 3 4 Want of attention at birth .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Chlorodyne (over dose) .. .. 1 .. 1 2 Injuries on railway .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Blood poisoning .. .. .. .. 1 1 Poisoning by shell fish .. .. .. .. 1 1 Poisoning by belladonna .. .. .. .. 1 1 Asphyxia from noxious vapours .. .. .. .. 1 1 Erysipelas after burns .. .. .. .. 1 1 Suicidal: Hanging 1 .. 1 .. 1 3 Cut throat 1 .. 2 .. .. 3 Drowning 1 1 .. .. .. 2 Bullet wound .. 1 .. .. 1 2 Poisoning .. .. 2 .. 1 3 Strangulation •• •• •• .. 1 1 Homicide: 2 2 Hemorrhage from cord •• 1 •• • • .. 1 Murder: Hæmorrhage from coal 1 •• •• .. •• 1 Executions •• •• •• • • 1 1 Open Verdicts: Drowning .. .. .. .. 3 3 Found dead .. .. 1 .. .. 1 Totals 34 15 26 2 75 152 c 2 20 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Vaccination. The next Table, from figures kindly supplied to us by the Clerk to the Guardians, shows the amount of Vaccination performed in the district during the year 1895. TABLE XII. SUBDISTRICTS. Number of Births Returned from 1st January to 31st December 1895 Successfully Vaccinated. Insusceptible of Vaccination. Had Small-pox. Dead Unvaccinated. Postponed by Medical Certificate. Removed to District, Vaccination Officer of which has been duly apprised. Removed to places unknown, or which cannot be reached; and cases not having been found. Clapham 1169 734 9 .. 123 34 74 195 Putney 474 320 6 .. 49 31 .. 68 Streatham 1380 959 11 .. 110 53 • • 247 Wandsworth 1679 1328 14 .. 146 38 24 129 Totals 4702 3341 40 .. 428 156 98 639 Out of 4,702 births registered in that year, 3341 children were returned as successfully vaccinated, and 722 were accounted for by insusceptibility, death before vaccination, postponement, etc., leaving 639 not traced out, and presumably not vaccinated. This gives a percentage on the total births of 13.3. The percentages for the last ten years are as follows:— 1886, 1887, 1888, 1889, 1890, 1891, 1892, 1893, 1894, 1895, 6.6 10. 6.4. 6.4. 6.8. 8.6. 11.3. 10.8. 13.4. 13.3. This shows that there has been a marked diminution in the amount of vaccination performed in the ten years. Report of the Royal Commission on Vaccination.. The long delayed report of the Royal Commission was issued in 1896. The one satisfactory feature is that all the Commissioners except two were strongly convinced of the efficacy of 21 district. vaccination in preventing and modifying Small Pox, and even the two dissentients admit a degree of usefulness in the practice. There were a number of recommendations made as to altering the present system, so much so as practically to lead to the abolition of compulsion. The Commissioners, however, consider that the steps they recommend would lead to the more extensive vaccination of the population by removing friction. It is recommended, besides the omission of a second prosecution for the same non-vaccinated child, that any parent who has an honest and bona fide objection to the practice should, by making a statutory declaration, be free from any consequence for not having his child vaccinated. Unless the process of making a statutory declaration were contrived to be at least as troublesome as procuring the vaccination of the child, it would be the course selected by the great mass of people, who have no strong views on the matter and only want to do what is the easiest to themselves. Some of the other recommendations seem to us more likely to do what the Commissioners desired, that is to increase the amount of vaccination. They are principally the provision of calf lymph, and the adoption of a modification of the system in force in Scotland, where the public vaccinator attends at the house of the child to be vaccinated, and not at a public station, and the extension of the age when a child must be vaccinated to six months. There is also a recommendation, which apparently would result in the abolition of the public vaccinator, by payment out of the public funds of private practitioners for vaccination and rendering their work liable to inspection. This appears to us to be not likely to do good, though the suggested alteration of the form of certificate so that it should show how many insertions had "taken" would be an improvement. It is to be regretted that the report does not make any recommendation as to the 22 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. enforcement of more general re-vaccination, though the Commissioners express themselves strongly in favour of the practice. It remains, however, for the Government to decide what, if any, alterations in the present law would be efficacious in attaining what the Commissioners desire and recommend, the more thorough vaccination of the population. water supply. Below is printed a table extracted from the figures of the Annual Report of Professor E. Frankland to the Water Examiner. In commenting on the figures the following are extracts: "These figures show that the Thames water distributed during the year 1896 was somewhat inferior to that delivered during the previous year." As to the Bacterioscopic Examination of Water, Professor Frankland remarks that no pathogenic organism, that is an organism that is recognised as the cause of disease, has been found in the Thames water, and he regards the ordinary river microbes and the bacillus coli communis (which has been found in Thames water) as harmless and not indicative of sewage contamination. This conclusion is not, however, shared by other authorities on the subject. He adds that if a pathogenic germ should at any time be present in the raw river water, it would be extremely unlikely to pass through an efficient filter removing 99 out of every 100 microbes present in the raw river water. The safeguard is, therefore, obviously efficient filtration. With regard to the Southwark and Yauxhall Company, he states:— "Thus No. 3filter was not working satisfactorily in July, Nos. 4 & 5 were uniformly and highly satisfactory 23 District. on every occasion when samples were drawn from them, the water issuing from No. 4 on September 9th being absolutely sterile; but filter No. 8 yielded on 4 out of 10 occasions unsatisfactory results." As to the Lambeth Company. "Excepting in June and December this Company delivered water of excellent bacterial quality, the infraction of the standard in June being the only serious one; but, even in this month of abnormal results, the number of microbes was much less than that found in the water of three of the other Thames Companies." In other words the filtration has not been on all occasions efficient by Prof. Frankland's standard. 24 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Averages of the Monthly Analyses of Water in 1896. The numbers relate to parts per 100,000. Temperature in Centegrade degrees. Total Solid Matter. Oiganic Carbon. Organic Nitrogen. Ammonia. Nitrogen as Nitrates and Nitrites. Total Combined Nitrogen. Chlorine. Total Hardness. Proportional amount of Organic elements, that in the Kent Companies Water during the 9 years ending 1876 being taken as unity. Number of Microbe Colonies developed in each cubic centimetre of water. Number of days'supply contained in storage reservoirs. River Thames "Water (unfiltered) 11.9 29.93 .286 .048 .009 .209 .265 1.9 20.2 5.7 24107 • • Southwark and Vauxhall 12.9 28.54 .178 .025 .204 .229 1.8 20.0 3.5 432 4.1 Lambeth 12.2 29.14 .179 .027 .228 .255 1.9 20.4 3.5 47 6.0 25 District. Bye-Laws as to Houses Let in Lodgings. Owing to the receipt of a report from the London County Council by its Medical Officer of Health on the enforcement of these Bye-laws in the Metropolis, we were requested to report on the matter. Subjoined is our report. TO THE SANITARY COMMITTEE. BYE-LAWS AS TO HOUSES LET IN LODGINGS. 1.—By these Bye-laws two objects are intended to be gained, —the prevention of over-crowding and the enforcement of cleanliness,—and practically the whole series of these Bye-laws are directed to these end?. 2.—As regards these conditions, they can be dealt with as nuisances under the Public Health Act, and we have hitherto never had any difficulty in so dealing with them. At the same time procedure is more easy under the Bye-laws, as it is usually easier to prove a breach of a bye-law than to prove a nuisance. 3.—The practice in this District has hitherto been to apply the Bye-laws only in those instances where from the special character of the inhabitants, or of the houses, there has seemed some particular reason for doing so. 4.—It seems to us, however, that Section 94 of the Public Health (London) Act and the Bye-laws as made by your Board allow strictly of no such discretion, but that they apply ipso facto to every house let in lodgings or occupied by more than one family, and which does not come under the exemption clause (as regards the amount of rent payable). It would follow therefore that the London County Council might maiutain that the Board had made default in carrying out their duties if the Bye-laws were not enforced, and might proceed under Section 100. 5.—On the other hand the increase of inspectorial work would be enormous, not only in getting the houses registered but in the periodical visits that are rendered necessary; and it may be doubted whether the results would be proportionate to the work done, especially as it would inevitably lead to the comparative neglect of similar property which would not come under the Bye- 26 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. laws, not being occupied by more than one family. It is often the case that small houses in which there is only one family need quite as much attention to keep them sanitary as those that are let in lodgings. 6.—We think therefore that it is preferable to have the systematic house-to-house visitation which it has been the endeavour to carry out in this District for years past. It is regrettable ,however, that in some of the sub-districts this has lately shown a falling off, owing to the time of the inspectors being so much taken up in the inspection and testing of the drains of new houses, which are becoming increasingly numerous every year. 7.—We think it highly desirable that the inspectors should be relieved of this duty, with the object of getting more house-tohouse inspection done, and that in each sub-district one or more properly qualified officers should be appointed to test the drains of new houses. This we think would conduce more to the improvement of the sanitary condition of the District than would the making of a special effort to register and inspect houses let in lodgings under the Bye-laws. We lay stress on the fact that in this district the objects of the Bye-laws have practically been obtained for many years past. There has been a register kept containing the details required under these Bye-laws of the results of the house-to-house inspection which has been continuously going on. This inspection is chiefly confined to the poorer quarters of the district so that certainly all the houses let in lodgings to which these Bye-laws apply have been visited in most parts of the district at least once in 2 years, and any defects as to overcrowding, dirtyness, dampness, bad drainage, defective water supply or other nuisance have been found out and remedied. We think it would be a retrograde step to give this system up, with which we have every reason to be satisfied, for the sake of picking out particular houses which happen to be let in lodgings to the neglect of their fellows in the same street. Latterly, however, there has not been enough of this systematic house-to- 27 District. house inspection done in two at all events of the subdistricts, owing to there not being sufficient inspectors. The work in other directions has enormously increased, notably in testing drains of new houses, disinfection, and enquiries as to infectious diseases, inspection of workshops, &c., and a larger number of inspectors in proportion to the population becomes a necessity. Factory and Workshops Act, 1895. This Act came into operation on the 1st January, 1896. It has added very considerably to the responsibilities of Sanitary Authorities, but it has undoubtedly already done much good. The Sanitary supervision of workshops, which includes laundries, that is places where work is carried on and where steam or other mechanical power is not used, is now under the supervision of the Sanitary Authority and the supervision of the hours of work, &c., of the employes, women, young persons and children, is under the Factory Inspectors. Information of sanitary defects is given us by the Factory Inspector when any is found, and reciprocally the duty is cast on us of notifying the employment of women, young persons and children in workshops. The special points that have to be looked after in workshops are overcrowding, of which a definition is given in this Act, cleanliness, ventilation, freedom from effluvia and maintaining a reasonable temperature, and the provision of sufficient sanitary conveniences having regard to the separation of the sexes. Particulars as to the proceedings in respect to workshops will be found in the local summaries. TABLE XIII. Summary of Sanitary Operations in the entire District during the year 1896. Clapham. Putney Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. Total. Number of Houses and Premises Inspected 4963 2896 1893 81 3948 13781 Preliminary Notices served 2093 674 1304 79 1204 5254 Statutory Notices served 154 29 118 1 430 732 Number of Houses disinfected after infectious diseases 300 .. 327 44 376 1047 Number of rooms disinfected after infectious diseases 330 144 402 45 424 1345 Number of houses in which infectious disease recurred after disinfection .. 1 6 2 11 20 Number of houses from which bedding, &c., was burnt .. 1 .. .. 1 Bedding stoved 258 97 274 45 391 1065 Overcrowding abated 14 8 5 2 17 46 Rooms cleansed and repaired 1139 132 364 76 183 1894 Staircases and passages cleansed and repaired 254 24 4 .. 33 315 Drains relaid 148 95 248 '*5 203 699 New ventilating pipes 331 .. 252 15 105 703 Drains cleansed and repaired 483 178 71 10 325 1067 Syphon traps fixed to drains 1580 64 683 20 205 2462 Sinks altered to discharge outside over gullies 85 30 279 11 182 587 Bath and lavatory wastes altered to discharge outside over gullies 18 7 197 4 139 366 Rain water pipes disconnected from 215 23 277 10 105 628 Water closets cleansed and repaired 331 250 330 24 447 1382 Water closets, supply of water laid on to 1 2 140 8 336 487 Urinals cleansed, repaired, or water laid on 12 7 3 2 4 28 Accumulation of manure, &c., 25 63 21 3 66 168 Cesspools abolished 1 2 .. .. 2 5 Dust-bins provided or repaired 280 40 152 13 257 742 Stables and stable yards drained or paved and cleansed 11 4 6 3 10 34 Yards drained or paved and cleansed 2C3 66 113 2 148 622 Unwholesome or dilapidated houses cleansed and repaired .. 13 .. 9 2 24 Leaky house-roofs and gutters repaired 333 87 21 107 648 Houses supplied with water 14 8 22 5 14 63 Water cisterus cleansed covered, and repaired 138 104 71 .. 154 467 Cistern overflow pipes disconnected from drains .. .. .. .. 1 1 Well closed .. .. .. .. 1 2 Pig nuisances removed .. .. 3 .. 1 4 Unclassified nuisances 1003 '74 46 5 493 1621 Cases investigated by Magistrates 1 4 29 •. 12 46 Compulsory Orders obtained 1 3 17 .. 2 23 Compulsory works executed 1 3 11 •• •• 15 LOCAL SUMMARIES. CLAPHAM. Population. The population as enumerated at the Census taken in April, 1896, was 46,953, and estimated to the middle of the year, 47,122. The rate of increase shown in the decade from 1881 to 1891, has therefore not been maintained. Had it been so the population would have been 48,111, in the middle of 1896. The increase between the Census of 1891 and that of 1896, has been 6,735 only. Births and Birth-Rate. The number of births registered during the year was 1,144, of which 586 were males and 558 females. This is a fall on the previous year, but exceeds the three years before that. The birth-rate was 24.27 and is also less than in 1895, while the rate of natural increase, reckoned from the excess of births over deaths, was 11 .24. Deaths and Death-rate. There were 616 deaths registered in the subdistrict during the year, of which 299 were males and 317 females. There were among these, 27 of non-parishioners occurring in institutions in the sub-district; but in addition there were 115 deaths of Clapham inhabitants registered outside the boundaries. The net total of deaths is therefore 704 and the death-rate calculated from this was 14.94 compared with 15.3 in 1895. The uncorrected rate was 13.07. 31 Parish of Clapham. The following table gives the births, deaths, and rates corrected and uncorrected for the last ten years:— TABLE I. Birth and Death Rates. YEAR. Births. Birth-rate. Deaths from all Causes. Death-rate Uncorrected. Death-rate Corrected. Rate of Natural Increase. 1887 1,136 27.9 600 14.6 17.0 13.3 1888 1,076 26.0 551 13.3 15.9 12.7 1889 1,121 26.6 534 12.6 14.8 14.0 1890 1,033 23.2 599 13.88 15.9 9.32 1891 1,144 26.2 596 13.63 15.8 12.57 1892 1,043 23.3 611 13.66 15.58 9.64 1893 1,102 24.2 601 13.19 15.8 11.01 1894 1,023 22.05 501 10.8 12.9 11.25 1895 1,186 25.8 630 13.33 15.3 12.47 1896 1,144 24. 27 616 13.07 14.94 11.24 General Mortality. The following table gives particulars of all causes of death classified in age groups, and according to social position; the 27 deaths of non-parishioners are included. The next Table A gives the same facts in a different form, as required by the Local Government Board:— TABLE II. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. CLAPHAM | Total Deaths from each Class of 1 Disease, &c., in the Sub-District. Sex Age Social Position Population (Census). 1891}43,608 Estimated Population in middle of 1896}47,1221 Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 to 45 years. From 45 to 65 years. From 65 to 75 years. 75 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen, Clerks, &c. Industrial and Labouring Classes. CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. (Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 4 .. 4 1 i 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2, Diphtheria 9 4 5 .. 7 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 1 6 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 3 3 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 3 1 2 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 Measles 35 21 14 7 27 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 30 Whooping Cough 41 19 22 12 28 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 8 32 Influenza 4 8 1 .. .. 1 3 4 1 2 .. 2 4 6 Diarrhoea & Dysentery 32 21 11 29 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 6 24 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals of Zymotic Class 140 73 67 51 65 5 4 6 6 1 2 .. 7 30 103 Gout and Rheumatism 5 2 3 .. .. 1 .. 3 1 .. .. .. .. 1 4 Cancer & other Tumour 42 12 30 .. .. 1 1 8 15 12 5 5 4 16 17 Other Constitutional Diseases 7 4 3 2 1 6. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 3 Phthisis 54 32 22 1 1` 2 15 24 10 1 .. .. 4 17 33 Other Tuberculan Diseases 24 11 13 8 6 6 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. 8 16 III. Local. Nervous 57 28 29 14 4 2 2 8 16 4 7 2 1 27 97 Circulatory 72 35 37 1 2 2 6 8 32 10 12 4 3 33 32 Respiratory 89 39 50 24 17 1 5 4 8 10 20 6 2 90 61 Digestive 24 9 15 6 3 1 .. 4 6 4 1 .. 2 10 1? Urinary 16 11 5 .. .. .. .. 2 7 I 6 4 1 7 4 Generative 7 .. 7 .. .. . .. 7 .. .. .. .. 2 1 4 Locomotory 1 • • 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Integumentory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 50 29 21 49 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 15 35 | Con genital Defects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Old Age 14 6 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 11 1 3 3 7 V. Violence 14 8 6 3 1 .. 2 1 2 5 .. .. .. 1 13 VI. III-defined& not specified III-defined Not Specified .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 616 299 317 169 101 21 36 78 104 53 64 22 31 192 371 tr table TABLE OF DEATHS during the Year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary Sub-District o/Clapiiam ; classified according to Diseases, (A) Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. {Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) mortality from all causes, at subjoined ages. Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 14 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhoea and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever Ague. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. T.vphus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (&) (e) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) clapham 589 159 101 20 33 164 112 Under 5 ... 2 7 ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... 31 40 31 ... ... 2 41 3 4 96 260 5 upwds ... 2 2 ... ... 3 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... 45 48 69 10 146 329 hostel op god 17 ... ... 1 3 12 1 Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... 11 17 nursing homes 10 ... ... ... ... 6 4 Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 9 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Totals 616 159 101 21 36 182 117 Under 5 ... 2 7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 34 40 31 ... ... 2 41 3 4 96 260 5 upwds ... 2 2 ... ... 3 ... ... 1 ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... 52 48 69 10 166 356 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 115 7 8 3 9 59 29 Under 5 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 3 ... 2 5 15 5 upwds ... 1 - 2 ... ... 1 ... 15 15 20 7 28 100 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 27 ... ... 1 3 18 5 Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... ... ... 20 27 The next table gives particulars of these deaths. They were 115 in number, and are classified according to causes of death and age groups, and the character of institution in which they occurred. 54 took place in the Union Infirmary, 53 in the general and special hospitals, and 8 in those of the Metropolitan Asylums' Board. There were 117 of these deaths in 1895:— TABLE III. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. DISEASES. Total. Sex Age Institutions Males. Females. % Under 1. 1 to 65. 65 and upwards. Union Infirmary. General and Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 2 1 1 .. .., .. .. .. 2 Diphtheria 3 1 2 1 2 .. .. .. 3 Enteric Fever 2 2 .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhoea .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tubercular Diseases 18 13 5 .. 17 .. 6 12 .. Cancer 9 5 4 .. 9 .. 2 7 .. Rheumatism 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Respiratory Diseases 18 11 7 1 9 8 14 4 .. Circulatory Diseases 22 9 13 .. 15 7 14 7 .. Nervous Diseases 8 7 1 .. 6 2 5 3 .. Other Diseases 19 9 10 .. 9 6 7 12 .. Violence 9 6 3 .. 7 2 2 7 .. Old Age 3 .. 3 .. .. 3 3 .. .. Totals 115 65 50 7 79 29 54 53 8 35 Parish of Clapham. Ages at Death The proportion of the deaths at the various age groups to the total deaths was as follows :— Under 5 years 42.2 per cent. From 5 to 65 years • • .. 38.9 „ Above 65 years • • • • 18.9 „ This is a considerable increase of the group under 5 years of age and a proportionate diminution of that over 65. The Infantile death-rate was 1.38. In the previous four years the figures were 143, 146, 113 and 131. The rate for the whole of London in 1896 was 161. This is, of course, the rate of mortality of infants under 1 year of age per thousand births. social Position The proportion in the various social grades was as follows :— Nobility and Gentry 3-6 per cent. Professional Classes 5.0 „ Middle and Trading Classes 31.2 „ Industrial and Labouring Classes .. 60.2 „ Zymotic Mortality ond Sickness. The following Table gives the deaths from Zymotic Diseases for this and each of the last 10 years. The deaths that occurred in out-lying Institutions as well as those in the parish are included in it. D 2 36 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. TABLE IV. Zymotic Mortality in Claphaw. 1887 1888 1839 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. Scarlet Fever 8 15 2 5 2 15 22 9 3 6 Diphtheria 11 23 23 6 2 14 31 39 19 12 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 5 7 4 4 4 7 3 6 4 5 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Relapsing Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. 1 .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. 3 4 1 1 3 Measles 25 15 12 18 32 21 27 17 18 35 Whooping Cough 28 28 17 18 20 26 17 12 8 42 Influenza.. .. .. .. 4 22 31 20 12 37 12 Diarrhoea and Dysentery 24 15 11 18 12 12 25 14 41 32 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases 6 1 6 3 5 5 .. .. 1 .. Total deaths from Zymotic Disease 107 104 75 76 99 134 155 111 134 148 Zymotic Deathrate 2.6 2.5 1.7 1.76 2.26 2.99 3.4 2.39 2.83 3.14 Death-rate from all Diseases 13.9 12.4 11.6 13.88 13.63 13.66 13.19 10.8 13.33 13.07 37 Parish of Clapham. The total number was 148 and was greater than in any year of the decade but 1893. The Zymotic deathrate, 3.14, is also high, and is second only to that of 1893. The reason for these high figures is obviously to be found under the head of Measles and Whooping Cough, which together make up more than half the total deaths from these diseases. The death-rate without including these or Influenza would only be 123. The following table gives the notifications of infectious diseases received under the Public Health (London) Act, and the number removed to hospital, with the number of deaths among those removed and not removed. TABLE V. 1 Number of Cases Notified. Number of Patients removed to Hospital. Number died in Hospital. 1 Number died at Home. j Total Deaths. Smallpox l .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 221 127 2 4 6 Diphtheria 68 34 3 9 12 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 31 7 2 3 0 Continued Fever 1 .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever 1 .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 75 • • .. 3 3 Totals 398 168 7 19 28 Small Pox. One notification was received of a case of Small Pox from the out-patient department of a general hospital. It turned out, however, not to be a case of Small Pox at all. It is included in the above table however. The complete absence of Small Pox during the year is very satisfactory. 38 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Scarlet Fever. The number of cases notified, 221, shows a rise on the previous year when there were only 169. The cases were not so numerous as in 1893, when 303 were notified, and these years may be compared with each other as both were epidemic years separated by the usual interval. The deaths were six, two at the hospitals and four at their homes. The number notified in each month were as follows :— J anuary 17. July 25. February 5. August 19. March 7. September 23. April 15. October 46. May 8. November 30. June 8. December 18. The maximum was reached in October as has usually been noticed. There is not so marked a difference between the number in August and that in July as is generally found. The number removed to hospital was 127, or 57*4 per cent, compared with 47'3 per ceut. in 1895. The prevention of the spread of Scarlet Fever is made much more difficult o wing to the very mild type of the disease that has been prevalent. It has frequently occurred that children have been discovered in a peeling condition in whom the feverish stage had been very short and had not been noticed by the mother. In other instances it has seemed very probable that the illness has been concealed wilfully, the parents knowing what was the matter. One instance occurred in a court in Clapham, where information was given me by neighbonrs, and on visiting the house I found a child in the highly infectious or peeling sta^c. I was informed that the mother had stated to a O neighbour that she would not have a doctor because then the other children would be stopped from going to school, 39 Parish of Clapham. and so would lose a medal. It was not possible, however, to get satisfactory evidence to prove the parents knowledge of the presence of Scarlet Fever, without which it would be impossible to take proceedings for wilful exposure. The difficulty here is an illustration of what so frequently occurs and so often prevents anything being done to prevent or punish the most reckless exposure. Diphtheria. There were 68 cases notified, compared with 126 and 112 in the two preceding years, a very distinct fall therefore. There were 12 deaths, 3 at the hospitals and 9 at their homes. A glance at Table 1V. shows the progressive fall in the number of deaths from this cause since 1894, when there were 39 deaths. The percentage of deaths to cases was 17.6, almost exactly the same as in 1895, and materially lower than in 1894. There were removed to hospital 34, or 50 per cent, of the total number, about the same proportion as last year. The number in each month was as follows :— J anuary 7. July 3. February 2. August 8. March 3. September 6. April 4. October 12. May 6. November 4. June 6. December 7. The maximum is reached in October as in the case of Scarlet Fever. Careful inspection of the houses where these cases occurred and testing the drains revealed serious defects in only 15 instances. Presumably therefore, a considerable majority of them originated from direct infection from 40 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. other children. The only way in which Diphtheria could be stamped out would, it seems to me, be by the periodical medical inspection of all children attending schools. Otherwise there will always be a certain number of infectious throat cases attending school to the danger of other children. Enteric Fever. 31 cases were notified, and there were 5 deaths, as against 33 cases and 4 deaths in 1895. As regards the probable cause of these eases, 5 were feeling ill when they came into the parish from places outside it, one was certified not to be Enteric, and in 11 some drainage defect was found of a more or less serious character. In the other instances no fault could be found with the sanitary condition of the premises, but in many of them the sufferer only slept at home and was working and having meals in other parts of London during the day. The numbers in the different months were as follows :— January 2. July 2. February 1. August 3. March 1. September 3. April 1. October 7. May 3. November 2. June 2. December 4. There was also a case of Continued Fever notified in October. Puerperal Fever. One case, was notified ending in death. Erysipelas- There were 75 cases notified, and there were three deaths. Measles. No less than 35 deaths were due to this disease, the largest number of any year in the decade. The two previous years were characterised by 41 Parish of Clapham. a small number of deaths, "while there were 27 in 1893, and 32 in 1891. There was a great deal of Measles about in 1896, and as usual the deaths were largely due to Pneumonia, or other lung trouble. The large number of deaths from this cause and from Whooping Cough, which together make up 52 per cent, of the total deaths from Zymotic Diseases, forces one to think that some efforts should be made to prevent its spread, and to get people to take more care of the sufferers when ill. There is no doubt that the great majority of the children who die from Measles and Whooping Cough might be saved by very ordinary care, if the gravity of this condition were more generally recognised. Whooping Cough. Caused 42 deaths, also the largest number in the decade. It is still the commonest thing: to © come across cases of Whooping Oough in the waiting rooms of hospitals, and dispensaries. The invariable answer of the mother when reproached for it is, " She did not know there was any harm." This should be stopped, and could be if notification were in force. Diarrhoea. Was responsible for 32 deaths, not quite so many as in 1895, but exceeding the decennial average. Influenza. There were only 12 deaths attributed to this cause, as small a number as in any year since it has found its way among the causes of death. There was not any well marked epidemic of it in 1896. TABLE (B) TABLE OF POPULATION, BIRTHS, AND OF NEW CASES OF INFECTIOUS SICKNESS, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary Sub-District of Clapham ; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. Population at all ages Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several Localities for Treatment in Isolation Hospital. Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1896. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Typhus. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing Puerperal. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) CLAPHAM 43698 47122 1144 Under 5 ... 66 25 ... ... 5 1 ... ... ... ... ... 31 14 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds 1 155 43 ... ... 26 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 96 20 ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 43698 47122 1144 Under 5 ... 66 25 ... ... 5 1 ... ... ... ... ... 31 14 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds 1 155 43 ... ... 26 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 96 20 ... ... 6 ... ... ... ... ... 43 Parish of Clapham. Deaths from Non-zymotic Diseases. The appended table gives the number of deaths in the last 10 years, and shows whether these for 1893 are above or below the decennial average corrected for increase of population. 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Number above corrected decennial average. Number below corrected decennial average. Gout and Rheumatism 3 9 4 6 9 7 8 5 6 1 5 .. 1 Cancer and other Tumours 23 30 18 21 29 32 26 28 40 42 42 11 .. Other Constitutional Diseases 6 7 6 2 5 3 1 9 .. 2 7 3 T ubercular 77 75 68 69 79 71 90 67 06 61 78 .. .. Nervous 79 81 70 74 77 74 54 68 53 72 57 .. 19 Circulatory 35 52 49 56 57 59 62 48 61 58 72 15 .. Respiratory 103 110 103 105 139 125 116 113 88 146 89 .. 36 Digestive 39 46 41 18 26 32 36 34 38 22 24 .. 12 Urinary 16 14 9 15 15 12 16 22 13 15 16 .. .. Generative 5 2 2 1 5 1 2 4 .. 5 7 4 .. Locomotory 1 .. .. 1 1 .. 1 I .. .. 1 .. .. Integumentary .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Premature Birth, LowVitality,&c. 28 46 49 50 44 48 51 58 47 52 50 .. 1 Old Age 33 18 34 37 27 20 14 14 10 26 14 .. 11 Violence 12 9 13 13 16 15 24 13 12 13 14 .. 1 III-defined and Not Specified 1 •• .. .. 3 1 2 3 4 .. .. .. .. The deaths from Cancer numbered 42, and were 11 above the corrected decennial average. There were a number of deaths at the Home for the Dying (9) which did not properly belong to Clapham and therefore the real increase is very slight. Tubercular Diseases.—Numbered 78 and were exactly the average. This includes Consumption, and again deaths of non-parishioners come in here at the same home. 44 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Diseases of the Nervous System.—57 were 19 below the average, while those from Circulatory Diseases, were 15 above. The deaths from Diseases of the Lungs were only 89, and were 36 below the corrected average. That, of course, was largely a matter of weather, particularly the remarkable absence of cold east winds in the Spring, a time when Lung Diseases are generally most prevalent and fatal. The lessened amount of Influenza also probably had its effect. The deaths under the head of Premature Births and Low Vitality, 50 in number, were nearly the average, while those from old age were 11 below. Violence caused 14 deaths; this was 1 below the average. Inquests. Thirty-five Inquests have been held during the year, and the following shows the verdicts:— Males. Females, Total. Natural Causes 11 - 9 - 20 Accidental Crushed by Carts, &c. 2 Burns 2 1 Suffocation 1 1 Shock and Haemorrhage from an Ulcerating Pessary 1 Fall 1 Fractured Thigh - 1 - 10 Suicide Hanging 1 Cut Throat 1 Drowning - 1 - 3 Murder Haemorrhage from Cord - 1 - 1 - 19 15 34 45 Parish of Clapham. In addition there were 19 deaths registered on the authority of the coroner without any inquest being held. The causes to which these deaths were attributed included diphtheria, whooping cough, cancer, influenza, diarrhoea, heart disease, debility, &c., &c. It is not satisfactory to the statistician that these deaths should be so registered without any medical certificate, or medical evidence at an inquest, or any post mortem. No doubt many of them are practically certified by medical men, who, owing to the time that had elapsed between their seeing the patients and their death, were unable to give a regular certificate, but a doubt as to the correct statement of the canse of death will always arise in these cases. Disinfection. Disinfecting Station. General Sanitary Proceedings. During the year, 330 rooms in 300 houses, were fumigated with sulphur. In addition, rooms in 11 houses were certified by the medical practitioner in attendance to have been disinfected to his satisfaction. 258 lots of bedding, clothing, &c., have been disinfected by steam by the contractor. It has been found impossible hitherto to procure a site for this purpose. The property of the Board in the parish is not available owing to the provisions of the lease. It is to be hoped that the difficulty will be overcome, as I consider the disinfection of articles should be under the direct supervision of the officers of the Board. I have no reason to suppose that the work is not now efficiently done, but of course it is not possible to exercise much control over the details. Stripping and Cleansing Rooms after Infectious Disease. 252 notices were served to effect this. In 54 cases the work was done by the Board's employes. 46 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Unsound Food. The following is a list of articles of food destroyed, being found unsound and unfit for food;—1 box of eels, 1 box of herrings, 1 trunk of herrings, 1 trunk of cod, boxes of skate, 6 boxes of pears, and 1 box of melons. Underground Rooms. The provisions of the 1891 Act as 1o this natter appear to me very unsatisfactory. They only apply to rooms separately oocupied. In very many instances in certain parts of the District basement rooms are used for living and sleeping in, but in only 9 instances was there no other room occupied by the same tenant. Often only one room above ground goes with the basement tenancy, but that is sufficient to prevent the application of the section of the Act. It is, of course, just as bad for the poor people to sleep, some of them, in an underground room, if they have another room above ground as if they have none. The number separately occupied decreases year by year. Those so occupied were regularly inspected. Two of them do not comply in some small detail with the Act, but as the essential points, lowering the area level, &c., had been altered to my satisfaction a few years previously, they have not been interfered with. Workshops. 158 were inspected, and the following defects were found and remedied:—8 dirty, 2 insufficiently ventilated, 4 overcrowded, 3 dilapidated paving, 16 had insufficient water-closet accommodation. The Factory and Workshop Act, 1895, came into force on the 1st January, 1896, and considerably affected the relations of the Sanitary Authority with workshops. The definition of overcrowding is particularly valuable (250 cubic feet being required for each worker, and 100 when overtime is worked), and the provision of the notice in each room giving the number of persons who may be employed in it. The inclusion of laundries has, in this sub-district, added greatly to the number of workshops. 47 Parish of Clapham. There is no definition in the Public Health Act, 1891, or in the Factory and Workshop Act, 1895, as to what constitutes sufficient provision of water-closets, having regard to the separation of the sexes. The standard 1 have tried to conform to is one water-closet to every 20 males, or 12 females, and I have had no difficulty in doing so except in two instances where there are one and two persons over the number. The standard cannot, of course, reasonably be applied to a domestic workshop (laundry for instance) where perhaps a man and his wife work with two or three female employes. Apart from such cases, I think the standard is a fair one and should be enforced. At my instance, 25 additional water-closets have been provided in connection with 16 workshops. Smoke Nuisances. 13 cases came under notice, and 11 intimations, or warnings, were served, and were complied with. Cow-houses and Slaughter. Houses. Were inspected from time to time; they were also visited in September in reference to the renewal of the licenses, to which no objection was raised. Houses Let in Lodgings. These Bye-laws have been applied to one street of a particularly unsatisfactory kind. It is a cul-de-sac, and is, as is the tendency of all streets of such a character, occupied by a somewhat dirty class of people. There has been considerable improvement from the action of the Bye-laws in the direction of cleanliness of the houses. This appears to me to be practically the only benefit we get from these Bye-laws, and also the more ready dealing with overcrowding. It is a pity that generally dilapidated conditions cannot be proceeded against under them. In this particular street there are several 48 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. houses, two-storied ones, occupied by only one family, and their owners, of course, cannot be made to whitewash them in April unless they are bad enough to be a nuisance under the Public Health Act. 1 do not find that those that are occupied by two or more families get into worse condition than the singly occupied ones. Bake-houses. The bake-houses, 46 in number, were inspected twice during the year. Lime-washing was required in 9 instances in May and 16 in October. During the year, 4,963 houses and premises were inspected, and the total number of nuisances dealt with amounted to 5,159, of these 4,341 were abated under notice and 818 without, 2,247 notices were served, viz., 2,093 preliminary and 154 statutory. The table on page 28 gives a statement of nuisances dealt with that can be conveniently classified. In addition, 1,003 nuisances were dealt with besides those in the table, and the following were some of the works executed to remedy them: 424 new water-closets have been fixed in place of old apparatuses, 25 additional water-closets built, 40 closet apparatuses have been disconnected from drinking water cisterns, 8 closet apartments ventilated, 176 new soil-pipes fixed, 28 existing soil-pipes repaired, 3 ventilated, 8 existing ventilating pipes repaired, 43 leaky water fittings repaired, 12 cases of smoke nuisance, 32 damp houses, 38 walls repaired, 2 front steps repaired, 59 floors repaired, 5 ceilings repaired, 1 staircase repaired, 11 windows repaired, 3 fireplaces repaired, 33 cases of water in the basement, 3 cases of stagnant water, 1 latrine provided, privy abolished, 21 cases of animals kept so as to be a nuisance, viz.: fowls 7, pigeons 6, rabbits 5, ducks 1, ferret 1, dog 1. Infringements of the Bye-laws.—50 water-closets, 12 soil-pipes, 2 ash-pits, and yard paving were Parish of Clapham. 49 structed contrary to the Bye-laws and had to be altered, and 22 manure receptacles were also found to be contrary to the Bye-laws. The drains of 148 houses and premises have been reconstructed, 195 inspection chambers have been built and 331 new ventilating pipes fixed; and of these, 75 new drains, 106 inspection chambers, and 131 ventilating pipes were constructed without notice. Magisterial Proceedings. Nineteen summonses were issued in connection with nuisances, and of these 18 were withdrawn, the necessary works having been carried out, and, in the remaining one, the magistrate made an order for the work to be carried out. Six summonses were issued for infringements of the Bye-laws. These were all withdrawn, the necessary work having been executed. Three summonses were issued for exposing goods on the public highways, the defendants being fined 10s. and costs in two cases, and in the other 5s. and costs. One warrant for forcible entry was issued. In conclusion, I desire to express my satisfaction with the work done by the Sanitary Inspectors who have all shown their usual zeal and efficiency. OLIVER FIELD, M.D., D.P.H., Medical Officer of Health for Clapham E PUTNEY & ROEHAMPTON. The population of the sub-district of Putney and Roehampton, as enumerated at the Census of 1896, was found to be 20,566. Since the Census of 1891, the population has increased by 2,785. During the ten years, from 1881 to 1891, the population advanced from 13,221 to 17,771, an increase of 4,550. Since the year 1891, therefore the increase of population has been going on at a slightly more rapid rate. In the figures so enumerated of the population last year, we have got a perfectly reliable basis on which to calculate the various rates in the tables following. Births and Birth-rates. The total number of births registered during the year was 468, and of these 241 were males and 227 females. The birth-rate was 22.7 per 1,000 of the population—one of the lowest rates we have touched during the last twelve years. Deaths and Death-rates. 252 deaths were registered during the year in this sub-district from all causes. This number, of course, does not include those parishoners who have died in the various hospitals and institutions lying outside our registration sub-district. Eight deaths registered within this sub-district were of non-parishoners. If we substract this number from 252 and add 36—the number of deaths of parishioners occurring in the outlying institutions—we arrive at the true number of deaths among residents in this sub-district. Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 51 The death-rate, exclusive of all deaths occurring in outlying institutions, was 12.2 per 1,000 per annum. If corrected, however, for outlying institutions and nonparishoners as explained above, the death-rate would be 13.6 per 1,000 per annum. TABLE I. Birth and Death Rates. YEARS. Births Birth-rate. Deaths from all Causes. Death-rate. Rate of Natural Increase. 1887 349 22.3 196 12.5 9.8 1888 366 22.9 187 11.7 11.2 1889 376 23.0 182 11.1 11.9 1890 453 25.4 234 13.1 12.3 1891 479 26.9 213 11.9 15.0 1892 447 24.5 247 13.5 11.0 1893 462 24.7 256 13.6 11.1 1894 455 23.7 190 9.9 13.8 1895 472 24.0 258 13.1 10.9 1896 468 22.7 252 12.2 10.5 Rate of Natural Increase of Population The difference between the birth-rate and death-rate gives us the natural rate of increase of the population, if no emigration or immigration takes place. This rate only amounted to 10.5 per 1,000. This rate has not altered very much in recent years. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. 36 deaths of parishioners were registered as having occurred in various institutions lying outside this sub-district, and of these 17 were males and 19 females. The number of such deaths is considerably less than that of last year. Only three deaths occurred in these institutions E 2 52 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. from diseases of a Zymotic character, out of seventy-five infectious cases removed to hospital—a mortality of 4 per cent. TABLE II. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. DISEASES. Total. Sex Age Institutions Males. Females. Under I. From I to 60. 6o and upwards. Union Infirmary. General and Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospital. Diphtheria 2 2 .. .. 2 .. .. 1 1 Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Typhus lever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tubercular Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cancer 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Respiratory Diseases 5 3 2 .. 3 2 1 4 .. Circulatory Diseases 7 2 5 .. 3 3 6 l .. Nervous Diseases 3 1 2 .. 2 1 2 l .. Other diseases 14 6 8 .. 9 3 5 9 .. Violence 3 3 .. .. 2 1 .. 2 .. 36 17 19 3 23 10 14 19 2 General Mortality. The usual method has again been followed in Table III. of classifying all deaths registered within the sub-district, according to sex, age and social position. It is satisfactory to find that even with our increased population, absolutely fewer deaths were registered than during the previous year. Of the total number of 252, 71 were infants under 12 months, which is equal to 28*1 per cent, of the total number. Under five years of age there were 109 deaths registered, equal to 43*2 per Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 53 cent. of the total number. The mortality among children was, therefore, very much in excess of what we had last year, and is accounted for by the severe epidemics of Measles and Whooping Cough. Infantile Mortality. For every thousand births, 151 children died under 12 months. This large infantile mortality is chiefly due to the fact which I have mentioned above, viz:—the prevalence of Measles and Whooping Cough during the early months of the year, and to the respiratory complications which resulted from them. Social Position The proportion of deaths classified according to social position is as follows:— Nobility and Gentry— per cent. Professional Classes 9.12 ,, ,, Middle and Trading Classes 27.77 ,, ,, Industrial and Labouring 63.11 ,, „ The proportion of deaths among the industrial and labouring classes is increasing. This is doubtless what we may expect; as the population increases there is a progressively larger population of the artizan and labouring classes. As to the relative mortality in the various social grades in proportion to population, we have no means of knowing it. TABLE III STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. PUTNEY. Total Deaths from each Class of Disease. Ac., in the Sub-District. Sex Age Social Position - Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 & under 45 years. From 45 under 65 years. From 65 & under 75 years. 75 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants. Bankers, Ac. Middle and Trading Class' Shopmen, Clerks, Ac. Industrial and Labouring Classes. Population (Census), 1891 17,771. Census Population in 1896. 20,566 CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic Diseases. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diphtheria 2 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 4 3 1 .. .. 1 .. 3 .. .. .. .. 1 1 2 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 21 11 10 2 16 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 20 Whooping Cough 17 7 10 9 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17 Influenza 4 1 3 .. .. .. .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. 1 3 Diarrhœa & Dysentery 6 4 2 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. •• .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals of Zymotic Class 54 27 27 17 23 6 .. 6 2 .. .. .. 2 4 48 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cancer & other Tumours 12 1 11 .. 1 1 6 2 2 .. 2 6 5 Other Constitutional Diseases 4 1 3 2 .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 3 / Tubercular. Phthisis 16 11 5 .. 1 .. 2 7 5 1 .. .. 1 2 13 Other Tubercular Diseases 7 2 5 •• 5 •• 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 3 4 III. Local. Nervous 28 10 18 4 1 1 .. 5 6 5 6 .. 7 9 12 Circulatory 28 12 13 2 .. 2 3 6 9 3 .. 4 15 6 Respiratory 42 25 17 17 4 2 .. 1 3 5 10 .. 4 12 26 Digestive 31 13 18 19 2 .. 1 2 3 1 3 .. 1 7 23 Urinary 6 4 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 • • 3 .. 1 3 2 Generative 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Locomotory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 9 5 4 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 7 Congenital Defects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Old Age 8 3 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 •• .. 6 2 V. Violence 8 8 •• 2 •• •• 2 2 2 .. .. .. .. 2 6 VI. Illdefined Not specified Illdefined Not specified 1 •• 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Totals 251 122 130 71 38 10 8 29 37 23 35 •• 23 70 159 Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 55 TABLE IV. Zymotic Mortality in Putney and Roehampton Sub-district. Zymotic Mortality. 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Influenza .. .. .. .. .. 6 10 6 17 4 Puerperal Fever .. .. 2 1 • • 2 3 1 1 • • Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 2 .. 2 10 .. .. 2 3 1 21 Scarlet Fever 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. Enteric Fever .. 2 1 1 1 1 2 3 2 4 Diphtheria 1 2 .. .. .. .. 14 3 2 2 Whooping Cough 2 6 6 8 8 17 12 4 .. 17 Diarrhoea and Dysentery .. 4 .. .. 4 10 6 6 10 6 Other Zymotic Diseases 1 2 • • 1 7 .. .. 1 .. .. Total Deaths from Zymotic Diseases 7 16 12 21 21 36 50 28 33 54 Zymotic Deathrate 0.44 10 0.73 1.1 M 1.9 2.6 1.4 1.6 2.6 Death-rate for all Diseases 12.5 11.7 11.1 12.4 11.9 13.5 13.6 9.9 13.1 12.2 In Table IV. the deaths arising from Zymotic Diseases are tabulated and compared with those of the preceding nine years. It will be seen that they are largely in excess of those of previous years Of the total number of 54 deaths, 38 were due to Measles and Whooping Cough. All other Zymotic Diseases put together only caused 16 deaths. The total Zymotic mortality was 2.6 per 1,000, the largest Zymotic death-rate during the last ten years with the exception of 1893. The decennial average was 1.4. If we add the three deaths from Zymotic Diseases which occurred 56 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. in outlying institutions, it gives us a total of 57, which is equal to a Zymotic death-rate of 2.7 per 1,000 per annum. The number of notifications of dangerous infectious diseases received during the year is recorded in Table V. The total number was 164. Compared with the year 1895, when the notifications only amounted to 80, or the year 1894 when they amounted to 127, it will be seen that epidemic disease has prevailed throughout the year to a much greater extent than we have been accustomed to. TABLE V. No. of cases notified. No. of patients removed to Hospital. No. died in Hospital. No. died at Home. Total deaths. Scarlet Fever 83 53 1 .. 1 Typhoid Fever 15 6 .. 4 4 Puerperal Fever 1 1 .. .. .. Continued Fever 3 .. .. .. • • Diphtheria 49 16 2 2 4 Erysipelas 12 .. .. .. .. Membranous Croup 1 .. .. 1 1 Total 164 75 3 7 10 Small-Pox. No case of Small-Pox was notified during the year. Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 57 Diphtheria. During the first nine months of the year there were sporadic cases of Diphtheria in various parts of the sub-district, but nothing in the nature of an epidemic. It will be seen, from the monthly notifications which I append, that 11 cases occurred during the first nine months. In October, 24 cases were notified ; in November 8, and in December 6. TABLE VI. MONTHLY NOTIFICATIONS OF INFECTIOUS DISEASE. Scarlet Fever. Typhoid Fever. Puerperal Fever. Diphtheria. Erysipelas. Continued Fever. Membranous Croup. Total. January 1 5 1 1 1 .. .. 9 February 4 .. .. .. 4 1 .. 9 March 2 1 .. 4 1 .. .. 8 April 2 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 May .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 June .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 July 3 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 5 August 7 .. .. 3 3 .. .. 13 September 3 .. .. 1 1 .. .. 5 October 21 3 .. 24 .. .. .. 49 November 23 2 .. 8 1 .. .. 34 December 17 1 .. 6 •• .. .. 25 Total 83 15 1 49 12 3 1 164 Nearly all the cases notified during the last three months occurred in the village of Roehampton and the surrounding district. During the course of the epidemic I made two reports informing you of my view as to the cause of the epidemic and the measures taken to put an end to it. They were as follows:— 58 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The Board of Works for the Wandsmorth District. COPY REPORT OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER OF HEALTH FOR PUTNEY AND ROEHAMPTON. Putney, 10th November, 1896. I beg to acknowledge receipt of copy of letter received by you from the Local Government Board, with reference to the epidemic of Diphtheria in Roehampton. I have brought this matter before the Putney Local Committee on two occasions, the members of which have been made fully aware of my views in regard to the cause and progress of this outbreak. The first case was notified to me on October 13th. During the week following that date twelve fresh eases were notified. During the second week eight fresh cases were notified. During the 3rd week two fresh cases were notified, the date of the last notification being 31st October. The chief facts of importance in connection with the epidemic were these. The outbreak was very sudden and disappeared very quickly. The cases were almost entirely those of children between the ages of 6 and 11 years. Nearly all these children attended the National Schools at Roehampton village, and were coming into close contact with each other daily. The type of the disease was so extremely mild that it was with the greatest difficulty we could impress the villagers with the necessity of rigid isolation. In many cases they would not allow the children to be removed to hospital, and it was found by the Inspector on his visiting the premises that in some instances the sick children were allowed to remain in the same room with others not affected. There has been no death resulting from these twenty-three cases, and all are now well. The sanitary condition of the houses was enquired into, as Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 59 well as the water and milk supply. Nothing was discovered in these directions to account for the epidemic. The condition of the school premises was also enquired into and several defects connected with the sanitary arrangements were discovered and have been pointed out to the school managers. In the first place, there is no shelter or covered area where the children can play in wet weather. Their playground is practically the cloak-room and passages round about the water-closets. These water-closets are of an obsolete type. They are not self-cleansing, and the receivers were foul when I inspected them. Apart from the condition of the closets themselves, their position in the school is very bad and insanitary. Instead of being outside the school altogether, they are really situated inside in close proximity to the cloak-room, where, as I have stated, the children are in the habit of spending their intervals in wet weather. The number of water-closets is also deficient. When diphtheria was imported into this school we had all the conditions present for a rapid spread of the disease. To my mind the cases were the result of personal infection from one child to another. The disease broke out during cold wet weather, when naturally the children were prevented from playing in the open. The school atmosphere must have got vitiated from the want of sufficient ventilation and from the emanations arising from the foul water-closets. The steps I have taken to prevent the spread of the disease were:— 1st. Removal of cases to hospital where possible, or isolation at their own homes. 2nd. Closure of schools for a period of four weeks. 3rd. Disinfection and cleansing of school premises. These efforts I am happy to say have doubtless very materially helped to stamp out this epidemic, which at one time appeared very serious. (Signed) WILLIAM Y. ORR, Medical Officer of Health for Putney and Roehampton. 60 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. SECOND REPORT ON DIPHTHERIA AT ROEHAMPTON. Putney, 17th December, 1896. I beg to acknowledge receipt of letter of the Local Government Board, asking for further particulars in regard to the prevalence of Diphtheria at Roehampton, and also as to the existence of bad smells from sewers and nuisance from farm yard. In my previous report upon the epidemic of Diphtheria, I expressed my conviction that the disease began among the children attending the infant department of the National Schools at Roehampton. The extension of the epidemic was facilitated by insufficient care on the part of the villagers in isolating the cases and by the insanitary conditions existing at these schools. The number of notifications of Diphtheria is as follows:— During the week ending 19th October 11 cases. ,, ,, 26th ,, 8 „ „ „ 2nd November 5 „ ,, ,, 9th ,, 0 „ ,, ,, 16th „ 0 „ „ „ 23rd ,, 2 „ ,, ,, 30th ,, 2 „ „ ,, 7th December 2 „ ,, ,, 14th „ 0 „ The course of the epidemic would seem to bear out the view I formerly expressed. The disease broke out suddenly and practically terminated after the third week. In regard to the cases notified since the middle of November, I have got information that in regard at least to three of them no Diphtheria bacilli were found in their throats after removal to hospital, and the diagnosis in those cases was tonsillitis. The Surveyor has been making a special investigation of the condition of the Roehampton sewers, and is making a report thereon. As to the complaint of nuisance arising from farm yard, I am Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 61 quite prepared to admit that offensive smells may arise occasionally from the piggeries in connection with it. I don't think piggeries can exist at all without smells arising from them when being cleaned out. Several years ago we made an application to the magistrate to have these piggeries removed. The magistrate at that time would not make the order for their absolute removal, but ordered them to be removed further away from the nearest inhabitated houses, so as to be beyond the prescribed distance. From that time we have had no complaints of nuisance arising from them until the present complaint by Mr. Hickman in connection with this epidemic. The Local Committee has given instructions for special investigations to be made as to the existence of any nuisance. So far no nuisance of a definite nature has been discovered arising from the farm yard, but observations will be still continued from time to time. I may add that the mild type of the epidemic disease, which was very apparent at first, has been maintained throughout. There has been no fatal issue in any of the cases affected. (Signed) WILLIAM Y. ORR, Medical Officer of Health for Putney and Roehampton. I have not much now to add to what I have said. So far as I could make out the disease was imported to the Roehampton National Schools from Southfields. After the disease got a footing the conditions were present for the rapid extension of it. In some of the cases reported to me afterwards no diphtheric bacilli were found in the throat. Here we have a great difficulty, not only in the diagnosis of the disease, but also in its prevention. During the same epidemic, among children attending the same school and living in the same village, a number of cases of sore throat suddenly broke out. The clinical symptoms in the various cases are indistinguishable, or so alike that they cannot be distinguished. In some we find the characteristic diphtheric bacilli, but in others no such bacilli can be found. In the former we have to deal from a bacteriological point of view 62 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. with true diphtheria, in the latter only with tonsillitis. Whatever the theories may be to account for this, the practical issue which we as sanitarians have to see to is that precautionary measures of isolation, &c., should be applied to all cases alike. One remarkable feature of this epidemic was its extremely mild nature. No fatal case resulted from it. Herein I think we have one explanation of the rapid spread of the disease. All the early cases were so mild that it was with the greatest difficulty we could get the people to understand how essential it was to isolate the infectious children. On several occasions the inspector found on visiting the premises an infected child in one corner of the room aud the other children of the family, as well as the parent, keeping the sick one company. On remonstrating with them the reply was, "Oh, the child is not ill—only got a touch of a sore throat." The imperfect isolation carried out in too many cases was, I am satisfied, partly the cause of the disease spreading so rapidly. Unfortunately, at the time the hospitals were full and the sick could not be removed so rapidly as we desired. I am glad to be able to report that the school managers here remedied the sanitary defects existing in connection with the schools. The water-closets are now placed outside the building and new ones have replaced the old ones which were of an obsolete type. A shelter has also been provided where the children can resort in wet weather. Scarlet Fever. 83 cases of this disease were notified during the year, and, as in the case of Diphtheria, the majority of these occurred in the last three months of the year. Up till the end of September, 22 cases were notified, and during the last three months 61 cases. A fatal result only Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. 63 followed in one case. The case mortality was only 1.2 per cent., while the case mortality occurring in the Asylums Board Hospitals was 4 per cent. The mortality in this sub-district from Scarlet Fever was equal to only .04 per 1,000 of the population living, while that of London generally was .21 per 1,000. These figures show that the epidemic from which we suffered was of an extremely mild character; so mild indeed was it that in many cases children were allowed to go about by their parents in ignorance of the fact that they were suffering from any serious disease. A case was notified to me as having occurred in a certain house let out in flats. When the inspector made the usual enquiries he ascertained that the child had been playing a short time before with children occupying another flat in the same house, and that they had not been very well. On investigating the condition of these children I found several of them desquamating freely after a mild attack of scarlatina, and one suffering from kidney complications as doubtless the result of improper exposure. In another case a child was brought to me by the teacher of the girls school, who was suspicious of her condition. I found her desquamating also freely in her hands. She had been attending school in this condition. It would indeed be a matter of surprise if under these conditions the disease did not spread. Happily, I have always found in the prevention of the spread of disease the sanitary authorities have most useful auxiliaries in the teachers of the National Schools. They have a very intelligent knowledge of the prominent symptoms attending the common infectious diseases, and let us know when their suspicions are aroused in regard to any case. By their help in this way we are enabled to limit the dissemination of disease. During the year, the first case occurred in which it was necessary, in my opinion, to apply to the magistrate for an order for compulsory removal to hospital of a child 64 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. suffering from Scarlet Fever. The family consisted of the parents and three children, and occupied the ground floor of a house in Lifford Street. The sick child, I found on visiting the house, in the front room and nursed by the mother. No isolation was possible in the circumstances, but the father absolutely refused to let the child go to hospital. As the case was situated in a crowded neighbourhood and I felt convinced that every day the child remained added to the danger of the surrounding population, I considered it my duty to apply for a magistrate's order for removal. So far as I know it was the first case of the kind under the new Act of 1891. Section 66, under which we applied for the order, is rather indefinite in its wording and depends entirely on the interpretation which the magistrate gives it. It is as follows:—"A person suffering from any dangerous infectious disease, who is without proper lodging or accommodation, or is lodged in a tent or van, or is on board a vessel, may, on a certificate from a legally qualified medical practitioner, &c., be removed by order of a Justice to any hospital within a convenient distance of London." It is evident that the point turned upon what is a proper lodging or accommodation for a person suffering from any infectious disease. The magistrate took a common-sense view of the question, and held the child in question had not proper lodging or accommodation, and thereupon granted the order for removal. The father felt aggrieved at the action taken by us and still refused to allow the child to go, but ultimately consented after an interview with the Putney Local Committee. Measles and Whooping Cough. These two diseases were very prevalent during the first quarter of the year. As they are not notifiable diseases it is impossible to say how many cases there were. The two diseases together, however, were the cause of 38 deaths, a greater number than we 65 Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. have had during the last ten years, and more than twice the number resulting from all the other Zymotic Diseases put together. On the 25th Feb. the National Schools in both Putney and Roehampton were closed for three weeks, and at the same time the managers of the various Sunday Schools were requested to do the same. The closure of the Elementary Schools is the only effective means in our power of putting a stop to the spread of these epidemics. In this case it was followed by a marked diminution in the number of cases. Unfortunately the closure of Schools cannot come in force at so early a period as we could wish, as we have no certain means of knowing to what extent it is epidemic, and are sometimes made aware of it only when the certificates of death resulting therefrom are registered. Typhoid Fever. Fifteen cases of this disease were notified, and of these four died, giving us a case mortality of 26 per cent. and a death-rate per 1,000 of the population of .19. Among the cases admitted into the Metropolitan Asylums Board Hospitals the case mortality was 10 per cent. and the death-rate from Typhoid Fever per 1,000 of the population was .14. Not only therefore was Typhoid Fever much more prevalent in this sub-district than in London generally, but the severity of the cases was also greater if we may judge from the case mortality. The eating of contaminated oysters was again supposed to be the cause of the disease in several cases. The following two tables, A and B, are inserted at the request of the medical officer of the Local Government Board to ensure a uniform method of classification over the entire Kingdom. The same information is given under different forms in the various other tables:— TABLE (A) TABLE OF DEATHS during the year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary Sub-District of Putney; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. (Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) MORTALITY FROM ALL CASES, AT SUBJOINED AGES. (i) Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhoea and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Ague. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia, and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (c) (f) (g) (h) PUTNEY 252 71 38 10 8 66 59 Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 16 6 ... ... 1 21 2 2 39 105 5 upwds ... ... 2 ... ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... ... 15 21 23 6 72 147 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Totals 252 71 38 10 8 66 59 Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 16 6 ... ... 1 21 2 2 39 105 5 upwds ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 ... ... ... 15 21 23 6 72 147 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 36 3 3 3 1 18 8 Under 5 ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 6 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 4 7 2 14 30 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 8 ... ... ... 1 7 ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 5 2 8 TABLE(B) TABLE OF POPULATION, BIRTHS, AND OF NEW CASES OF INFECTIOUS SICKNESS, coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary Sub-District of Putney; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. Population at all ages Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several Localities for Treatment in Isolation Hospital. Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1896. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Memb+ranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (6) (c) (d) (e) PUTNEY 17771 20566 468 Under 5 ... 17 7 1 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 8 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... 66 42 ... ... 14 ... ... 1 ... 12 ... 45 15 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 17771 20566 468 Under 5 ... 17 7 1 ... 1 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 8 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... 66 42 ... ... 14 1 ... 1 ... 12 ... 45 15 ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... F2 68 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Non-Zymotic Diseases were the cause of 198 deaths. TABLE VII. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF NON-ZYMOTIC MORTALITY. CAUSES OF DEATH. 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism .. 5 .. 1 .. 2 1 .. Cancer and other Tumours 6 8 9 9 8 12 16 12 Phthisis 17 28 23 22 26 16 20 16 Other Tubercular Diseases 5 3 1 1 7 6 6 7 Other Constitutional Diseases 1 2 1 .. 2 2 3 4 Local. Nervous 32 34 23 37 31 20 28 28 Circulatory 17 18 22 19 22 20 22 25 Respiratory 30 42 43 55 53 29 57 42 Digestive 19 26 29 20 21 19 21 31 Urinary 5 5 8 5 5 4 5 6 Generative .. 2 1 2 1 1 2 1 Locomotory .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Integumentary .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 12 26 10 18 13 11 20 9 Congenital Defects 2 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. Old Age 8 4 10 5 6 10 6 8 Violence 9 9 9 8 7 10 15 8 All other Diseases 5 1 5 9 2 •• .. 1 Cancer and other Tumours. Twelve deaths resulted from these diseases. The average during the last 8 years was 8.5. The tendency is for these diseases to increase. Phthisis. Sixteen deaths were registered. The average during the last eight years was 21. It is very satisfactory to find that the deaths from this disease show a progressive diminution. Three deaths from Phthisis occurred in outlying institutions. To find the true Phthisis death-rate these must be added to those registered within the district. We thus find the true death-rate from Phthisis to be .91 per 1,000. In Registration London, the death-rate from this disease was 1.83 or just about twice our own. 69 Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. Diseases of the Respiratory Systems. Only 42 deaths arising from diseases of this class were registered—a smaller number then we have had within the last four years with the exception of 1894. I think this is chiefly to be accounted for by the absence of Influenza in a very serious form. Inquests. The following Table gives the number of inquests held during the year, and the causes of death in the respective cases. Only 15 inquests took place, compared with 75 during the preceeding year. table viii. Inquests and Verdicts. Males. Females. Total. Natural Causes.— 4 4 8 Drowning 1 • • 1 Accidental.— Fracture of Skull 1 • • 1 Suffocation 1 • • 1 Want of attention at Birth .. 1 1 Suicide.— Drowning 1 • • 1 Bullet Wound 1 • • 1 Homicide.— Haemorrhage from umbilicis 1 • • 1 Open Verdict.-— — — - Total 10 5 15 Disinfection is still being carried out by the same method followed in previous years, and the bedding, &c., is subjected to the action of superheated steam, by a contractor acting for us. I am satisfied that the process of disinfection as carried 70 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. out here is practically effective. In only one house did infectious disease recur after disinfection, but in that case I had good ground for arriving at the conclusion that the disease was brought back by the patient after his return from hospital. I made a special report of this case to the 1'utney Local Committee, who drew the attention of The Asylums Board to it. Sanitary Work. A Table of the sanitary operations will be found as usual in the combined report for the district. The house-to-house inspection has been continued as vigorously as possible. On account of the time of the Sanitary Inspector having been more occupied in connection with the various epidemics, only 2,896 houses were inspected, compared with 3,432 during the previous year. 574 preliminary and 29 statutory notices were served to remedy nuisances. 144 rooms were disinfected after infectious diseases, and in only one house did infectious disease recur after disinfection, overcrowding was abated in eight cases, and 132 rooms were cleansed and repaired. 95 defective drains were relaid, and 250 water-closets were cleansed and repaired. The unclassified nuisances which were abated were as follows:— 8 Defective soil-pipes, joints re-caulked. 6 Defective ventilating pipes, joints re-caulked. 17 Stoneware gully traps fixed to drain in lieu of iron bell traps. 14 Rain-water pipes repaired to prevent soakage of walls. 2 Privies abolished and modern form of w.c. apparatus fixed in lieu of same. 6 Animals kept so as to be a nuisance. 2 Rotten floors repaired. 9 Separate supply of water for drinking purposes vided. 10 Foul manure pits abolished and wire cage manure receptacle provided. 71 Sub-district of Putney and Roehampton. The insanitary property at the corner of Biggs' Row, in respect of which a closing order was obtained, has now been demolished. I received one application in respect of several houses in Roskell, for exemption from the inhabited house duty. These premises I accordingly inspected and was enabled to give the necessary certificate. An analysis was made of the water of some wells in College Street, which is used for drinking purposes. The water was found to be impure, but not sufficiently bad to warrant us in taking legal proceedings to have the wells closed. An intimation of the condition of the water supply was made to the owners of the property, and I understand steps have since been taken to lay on a supply from the Company's mains. In the process of disinfection the following amounts of the various substances have been used:— 45 gallons of carbolic acid containing 95 per cent of tar acids. 45 cwts. of carbolic powder containing 15 per cent of carbolic acid. 2 cwts. 1 qr. 4lb. of roll sulphur. 1 cwt. of permanganate of potash crystals. All the bakehouses have been frequently inspected and found in a satisfactory condition. The necessary lime-whiting and cleansing has been done twice during the year. All workshops have been inspected and found in a satisfactory condition, with the exception of 2 cases in which notices were served and the necessary cleaning done. Lists of out-workers have been obtained during the year from shops employing them. Notices have been 72 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. forwarded to the various authorities of the districts where they reside. No notices have been received by us from any other Sanitary Authority of out-workers residing in this district. The cow-houses and slaughter-houses have all been inspected by myself. In the case of one cow-house it was necessary to have certain alterations made to conform to the regulations of the London County Council before the license was renewed. I have again to thank all those associated with myself in connection with the sanitary work of the parish, for the zeal and ability with which their duties have been carried out. To the Putney Local Committee I tender my grateful acknowledgments for the courtesy and support which I have at all times received from them. Wm. Y. ORR, M.B., C.M., D.P.H., Medical Officer of Health for Putney and Roehampton. STREATHAM. Population The Census enumeration of 1896, shows that during the five years from 1891-1896, the population has increased at the rate of 2,276 per annum, producing a mean population of 55,907 for the middle of the year 1896, upon which will be based the various mortality and other rates. As suggested in my Report for 1895, the estimated population for that year was much below the actual, indicating the advisability of a quinquennial census. Births and Birth-rate. The births registered during the year numbered 1,277, of which 620 were males and 657 females, producing a birth-rate equal to 22.8 per 1,000 persons living during the year. This is slightly below that of the previous year. Deaths and Death-rate. During the year, 617 deaths were recorded as occurring in the district, of which 297 were males and 320 females, giving an uncorrected death-rate of 11.0 per 1,000. To arrive at the corrected death-rate, the deaths of non-parishioners occurring within the district, viz.—37 must be excluded; and those of parishioners outside, viz.— 93, included, producing a total of 673, and a rate of 12.0 per 1,000. 74 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Natural increase. The excess of births over deaths numbered 660; of males, 323, and females, 337. The rate of natural increase was equal to 11.8 per 1,000. Table I. gives the number of births and deaths, birth-rates and death-rates, and rates of natural increase and is comparative of the past twelve years. TABLE I. Birth and Death Rates. YEARS. Births. Birth-rates. Deaths from all Causes. Death-rates. Rates of Natural increase. 1885 1,078 35.6 423 13.9 23.6 1886 1,078 34.3 473 15.0 19.2 1887 1,185 30.0 445 11.6 19.1 1888 ] ,184 26.3 515 11.4 14.8 1889 1,020 25.5 410 10.2 15.2 1890 1,063 25.3 484 11.5 13.7 1891 1,084 25.2 555 11.6 13.5 1892 1,067 23.7 558 12.4 11.3 1893 1,206 25.6 587 12.4 13.2 1894 1,163 23.7 492 10.0 13.6 1895 1,200 23.4 581 11.3 12.1 1896 1,277 22.8 617 11.0 11.8 Deaths In Outlying Institutions. The deaths of parishioners in outlying institutions numbered 93, of which 53 were males and 40 females. This is rather in excess of the number which occurred during the previous year, and is principally contributed to by those between the age of 25 and 65 years. The following table which indicates the nature of the cause of death, the age and sex of the deceased, and the character of the institution in which death occurred, and includes all parishioners dying in outlying general and special hospitals within the Metropolis and the Workhouse Infirmary. 75 Parish of Streatham. TABLE II. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. STREATHAM. DISEASE. Totals. Sex. Ages | Institutions. Elsewhere. Males. Females. Under 1 years. From 1 to 5 years. Total under 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 to 65 years. 65 years and upwards. Union Infirmary. General & Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlatina 2 2 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. Diphtheria 5 2 3 .. 4 4 1 .. .. .. 1 1 3 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus FEVERS. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Continued .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Measles 3 .. 3 .. 3 3 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhœa & Dysentery 2 2 .. 2 •• 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. Rheumatic 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Phthisis 9 7 2 .. .. .. .. 3 6 .. 5 4 .. .. Bronchitis Pneumonia & Pleuresy 4 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 1 3 •• • • Heart Disease 14 6 8 .. .. .. .. 1 9 4 6 6 .. 2 Injuries 7 5 2 2 2 4 .. .. 3 .. 1 5 .. 1 All other Diseases 45 25 20 3 3 6 3 3 20 13 16 28 .. 1 Totals 93 53 40 8 12 20 6 7 41 19 34 49 6 4 In the Wandsworth and Clapham Union Infirmary 34 of the deaths occurred, being equal to 36'5 per cent, of the total deaths in outlying institutions; 49 or 52'7 per cent, in general and special hospitals; 6 or 6'5 per cent, in the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board; and 4 or 4'3 per cent, elsewhere. 76 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. In respect of the seven following deaths from violence, inquests were held by the respective coroners: Male Scalds (accidental). Male Poisoned (suicide). Female Burns (accidental). Male Fall (accidental). Male Fall (accidental). Female Burns (accidental). Male Cut Throat (suicide). The following mortality statistics include all deaths registered as occurring within the sub-district. 77 Parish of Streatham. TABLE III. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. STREATHAM. Total Deaths from each Class of Disease. Sex. Age. Social Position. Population Census, 1896 54,338 Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. All under 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 to 45 years. From 45 to 65 years. From 65 to 75 years. 75 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class Middle and Trading Class. Industrial and Labouring Classes. Estimated Population, Middle of 1896 56,907 CAUSES OF DEATH. I. ZYMOTIC. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 2 .. 2 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Diphtheria 6 3 3 .. 1 1 5 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 4 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever.. 3 1 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. 1 .. 2 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing Fever .. Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. ..1 Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 26 11 15 9 15 24 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 21 Whooping Cough 35 14 21 15 18 33 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 31 Influenza 12 4 8 2 .. 2 .. 2 1 .. 5 2 .. .. .. 12 Diarrhœa & Dysentery 21 14 7 21 .. 21 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 20 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals of Zymotic Class 106 47 59 48 34 82 10 3 3 1 5 2 1 2 10 93 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 10 7 3 .. .. .. 1 1 3 1 3 1 .. 1 2 7 Cancer & other Tumours 50 15 35 .. .. .. 1 .. 4 26 12 7 4 4 7 35 Other Constitutional Diseases 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Tubercular.. Phthisis 30 19 11 1 .. 1 .. 8 13 5 1 2 .. •• 7 23 Other Tubercular Diseases 13 7 6 6 3 9 4 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 3 8 III. Local. Nervous 60 33 27 15 4 19 2 1 7 16 7 8 10 5 7 38 Circulatory 69 36 33 1 .. 1 3 3 10 24 19 9 4 4 6 55 Respiratory 103 51 52 34 15 49 2 1 4 18 15 14 9 5 15 74 Digestive 24 12 12 9 1 10 .. 3 2 6 3 .. 2 .. 4 18 Urinary 23 10 13 .. .. .. 1 2 6 8 5 1 2 2 6 13 Generative 6 .. 6 .. .. .. .. 2 3 1 .. .. 1 1 .. 4 Locomotory 2 1 1 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV.. Developmental. Premature Birth Low Vitality and Congenital Defects ) 56 26 30 56 .. 56 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 8 46 Old Age 47 23 24 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 37 4 2 10 31 V. Violence 17 10 7 5 .. 5 .. 1 5 4 1 1 • • • • 2 15 VI. All other Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 617 297 320 176 58 234 24 25 61 110 81 82 39 28 87 463 TABLE (A) TABLE OF deaths during the Year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Streatham; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Name Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. (See note 4 on back of sheet.) {Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) mortality from all causes, at subjoined ages. (i) Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers.. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis . Bronchitis, Pneumonia, and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Influenza. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a ) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) STREATHAM. 581 176 58 24 25 165 133 Under 5 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. •• .. 24 33 21 .. 1 49 1 .. 5 98 234 5 upwds .. 1 5 .. .. 3 .. .. 1 ... .. 2 2 .. 10 26 42 63 .. 12 180 347 ST. ANNE'S HOME. 36 .. .. .. •• 6 30 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. •• .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. 3 12 5 .. .. 16 36 Undor 5 5 upwds Under 5 5 upwds Under 5 5 upwds Totals 617 176 58 24 25 171 163 Under 5 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24 33 21 .. 1 49 1 .. 5 98 234 5 upwds .. 1 5 .. .. 3 .. .. 1 .. .. 2 2 .. 10 29 54 68 .. 12 196 383 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 93 8 12 6 7 41 19 Under 5 .. 1 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. 4 6 20 5 upwds .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 9 4 14 .. 3 39 73 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 37 .. .. .. .. 7 30 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 1 12 5 .. 1 16 37 79 Parish of Streatham. Infantile Death-Rate. The deaths of infants under one year of age numbered 176 or 137.8 per 1,000 of the births registered. This is in excess of former years and is chiefly attributable to the epidemics of measles and whooping cough which prevailed during the year under report. The following compares the infantile death-rates of the last six years. No. of deaths of infants under 1 ear of age. Rate per 1,000 of births registered. 1891 117 108.0 1892 128 120.0 1893 150 123.0 1894 109 93.7 1895 125 104.1 1896 176 137.8 Social Position. The subjoined table gives the proportion of deaths in the several social grades. Nobility and Gentry 39 = 6.3 per cent. Professional Classes 28 = 4.5 „ Middle and Trading Classes 87 = 14.1 „ Industrial and Labouring Classes 463 = 75.1 „ Total deaths 617 100.0 Compared with the previous year the deaths amongst the gentry, industrial and labouring classes were slightly lower, on the other hand, the mortality was higher in the middle and trading classes. 80 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The deaths resulting from the principal epidemic diseases, occurring within the sub-district, with the death-rates therefrom, as well as the death-rates from "all diseases" during the past eleven years are here set out. TABLE IV. Zymotic Mortality in the Sub-District of Streatham. 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1886 Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 11 21 .. 5 12 36 21 2 13 5 26 Scarlet Fever .. 4 5 1 .. 1 2 2 2 3 2 Diphtheria 6 7 30 6 1 1 7 5 10 9 6 Enteric Fever 3 2 1 1 4 2 3 3 4 10 3 Typhus Fever .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 26 6 22 9 34 19 18 15 17 1 35 Epidemic Diarrhœa 20 16 13 8 15 10 15 34 12 27 21 Other Zymotic Diseases 1 7 3 2 13 5 5 5 7 1 1 Influenza .. .. .. .. .. 21 35 16 10 36 12 Total deaths from Zymotic Diseases 67 64 74 32 79 95 106 82 75 92 106 Zymotic Deathrate 2.1 1.6 1.7 0.8 1.8 1.7 1.1 0.6 0.9 1.7 1.9 Death-rate from all Diseases 15.0 11.6 11.4 10.2 11.5 11.6 12.4 12.4 10.0 11.3 11.0 There were 106 deaths in this class, being slightly higher in number than that of the past few years, and due to mortality from measles and whooping cough. The deaths from diseases of the zymotic class yield a percentage of 17.1 upon the deaths from all causes, or 1.9 per 1,000 of the population. Table b. The following Table (B) records the notifications received under section 55 of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, during the year, and the cases removed to isolation hospitals. table table of population, births, and of new cases of infectious sickness, (b) coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1896 in the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Slreatham; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institution being shown as separate localities. Population at all ages Registered Births. Aged under or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several Localities for Treatment in Isolation Hospital Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1896 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. | Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Smallpox. Scarlatina.| Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid Continued Relapsing Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid Continued Relapsing Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) STREATHAM 42958 55907 1277 Under 5 48 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 29 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds 200 45 ... ... 27 2 ... 1 ... 45 ... 136 13 ... ... 9 ... ... ... ... 3 Under 5 5 upwds Under 5 5 upwds Under 5 5 upwds Under 5 5 upwds Total 42958 55907 1277 Under 5 ... 43 15 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 29 12 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... 200 45 ... ... 27 2 ... 1 ... 45 ... 136 13 ... ... 9 ... ... ... ... 3 G 82 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Small Pox. No cases of small pox occurred during the year, although prevalent in parts of the Metropolis. Measles. The mortality from this disease was much higher than that recorded for several years, 26 deaths occurring in the district and 3 in outlying institutions. Scarlet Fever. 248 cases of scarlet fever occurred during the year, 4 of which were fatal, 2 in hospital and 2 at the homes of the patients. Compared with the number of cases the mortality is remarkably low. 165 of the cases were removed to hospital. Diphtheria. The number of cases of this disease notified was 60, compared with 76 during the previous year. 25 of the cases were removed to hospital, 11 terminated fatally, 5 at hospital and 6 at home, the rate of mortality being higher than that of the previous year. As in general with the rest of the Metropolis, the disease continues to be of a very fatal character. Typhoid Fever. There was a considerable decrease in the number of cases notified from this disease; 27 being recorded, of which 3 only proved fatal, giving evidence of a decline in the virulence of the disease. Whooping Cough. The mortality from this disease was the highest recorded during the decennium. About 50 per cent. occurred in the second quarter of the year. It appears that the mortality from this disease together with diarrhoea and measles largely contributed to the higher zymotic mortality, over 75 per cent, being due thereto. Diarrhœa. The mortality from this disease, although below that of the preceding year, was above the average, 21 deaths being recorded, the majority of which occurred in the late summer and early autumn months. 83 Parish of Streatham. Cholera. Although suspicious cases have occurred during the year in some parts of the Metropolis, no cause for anxiety has heen experienced in this district. The Plague. This disease now so prevalent in India might readily be introduced into this country by means of merchandise, &c. if due precautions were not taken. Rigid scrutiny is, however, being observed in regard to all ships coming to our ports, both as regards cargo and passengers. Even should an outbreak occur, it would not be likely to extend far having regard to the general sanitary condition of the country, and the more effectual means at our disposal for dealing with such a disease. The following table gives the number of cases of infectious disease notified, removed to hospital, and the deaths which occurred therefrom both in the hospitals and at home. table v. DISEASES. Number of cases notified Number of patients removed to Hospital. Number died at Hospital. Number died at Home. Total deaths in Hospital and at Home. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. Diphtheria 60 25 5 6 11 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 248 165 3 2 4 Enteric Fever 27 9 .. 3 3 Continued Fever 2 .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 47 3 1 .. 1 Puerperal Fever 1 •• .. 1 1 Totals 385 202 8 12 20 G 2 84 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The death-rate from notifiable diseases was equal to 0.3 per 1,000 of the population. other Diseases. The following table shows the proportion of deaths, classified as constitutional, local, developmental, violence, and all other diseases in the Mortality Table, and is comparative of the past eight years :— TABLE VI. Comparative Table of Non-zymotic Mortality. CAUSES OF DEATH. 1889. 1890. 1891. 1892. 1893. 1894. 1895. 1896. Constitutional. Tubercular 60 49 41 42 39 39 43 43 Other Constitutional Diseases 21 34 38 34 39 36 39 61 Local. Nervous 77 68 77 72 72 57 67 60 Circulatory 37 28 46 35 46 37 66 69 Respiratory 65 95 127 111 117 82 121 103 Digestive 35 29 36 32 33 33 38 24 Urinary 13 13 13 19 14 18 19 23 Generative 7 3 .. 4 7 2 .. 6 Locomotory .. .. 2 6 1 .. .. 2 Integumentary .. •• 1 .. .. •• •• .. Developmental. Premature Birth Low Vitality 44 45 41 45 67 40 48 56 Congenital defects Age 20 40 29 40 52 54 37 47 Violence 9 9 5 11 10 17 11 17 All other Diseases .. 3 1 .. 5 2 .. .. Upon many diseases, comment is unnecessary by reason of their being of about the average mortality. Deaths from respiratory and digestive diseases show a slight decrease, whereas those from premature birth, age and violence, an appreciable increase. Ages at Death. The number of deaths under one year of age was 176; under five, 234, and under twenty-five, 283. 85 Parish of Streatham. They respectively equalled 28.5, 37.9, and 45.8 per cent. of deaths at all ages. senile Decay. From senile decay 47 deaths were recorded. Of these, 23 were males and 24 females, yielding a percentage of 7.6 upon deaths from all causes. The total number of deaths at 65 years of age and upwards was 163, of these 123 were over 70 ; 34 were 80 and upwards. Below is a tabulated statement of deaths at high ages. They formed 19.9 per cent.of deaths at all ages. TABLE VII. Age. Males. Females. Total. At 70 and under 75 22 21 43 75 „ „ 80 27 19 46 80 „ „ 85 8 10 18 85 „ „ 90 4 6 10 90 „ „ 95 3 3 6 95 „ „ 100 .. .. .. Total 64 59 123 inquests 37 cases were submitted to the Coroner, who deemed it necessary to hold inquests in 26 instances, and the following are the verdicts of the respective juries: — 86 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. MALE. FEMALE, Natural Causes 6 3— 9 Violence: — Open Verdicts.. Found dead 1 1 Accidental .. Suffocated in bed 1 3— 4 Chlorodyne (overdose) 1 1 Injuries on Railway 1 1 Falls 3 2— 5 Suicide ,. Poisoning 1 1— 2 Cut Throat 1 1— 2 Hanging 1 1 — — 17 Total 26 Sanitary Operations. As usual, the Sanitary operatious of the year are duly set out in Table XIII. of the combined Report. Inspections were effected in house to house, after complaint and after infectious disease in 1,863 instances, subsequently it was necessary to serve 1,304, notices to remedy sanitary defects. There were 10,219 drain inspections made, the water test being applied in 4,421 instances. 402 rooms in 327 houses were disinfected after infectious disease, and disinfection of clothing, &c., by super-heated steam in 274 cases was carried out. 248 drains were relaid or constructed, 5S3 syphon traps were fixed to drains, 330 water closets were cleansed or repaired, and water laid on in 140 instances. 152 dustbins were provided, and 113 yards drained or paved. The numerous other sanitary operations are recorded in the Table to be found in the combined Report. Parish of Streatham 87 Police Court Proceedings. 29 cases were investigated before the Magistrates during the year, 23 of these were in respect of defective drains and sanitary fittings. For contravention of bye-laws upon the part of builders, by not giving the required notice before executing sanitary works or performing works contrary to the specification of such bye-laws, two summonses were issued and convictions obtained. In one instance a house and stable without proper and sufficient water supply were dealt with. In 17 of the cases Magistrates' Orders were obtained and enforced, and in 12 cases the summonses were withdrawn on payment of costs, and the defendants promising to proceed with the work forthwith. For removing fish offal along the high road and using vans of improper make and thereby causing offensive smells, three owners were fined, and in one case a fine was imposed for removing fish offal along the high road at an improper hour. Mortuary. 25 bodies were received at the Public Mortuary during the year, none of which were those of persons dying from infectious diseases. Bakehouses. The usual half-yearly inspections of bakehouses were made, and the necessary cleaning and lime-whites carried out. I personally inspectei the whole of the cowhouses and slaughter-houses, and in no case found it necessary to oppose the renewal of the licenses. Several defects discovered being readily attended to by the owners of the premises. Cow-houses and Slaughter-houses. 88 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Factory and Workshop Act. Sanitary defects in connection with factories and workshops were discovered in 21 instances, and notices duly served to remedy the same. In conclusion, I am happy to record my appreciation of the very satisfactory manner in which the numerous and important duties of the staff have been carried out. F. F. SUTTON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health for Streatham. TOOTING. population. The census of 1896, showed that the population of Tooting in April Avas 7,307, and that an increase equal to 304 per annum had taken place during the intercensal period. The estimated population for the middle of the year is 7382, and upon this will be based the following vital statistics. There were 190 births registered during the year, of which 102 were males and 88 females, producing a birth-rate of 25.7 per 1,000 of the population. 365 deaths were registered during the year, 171 of males and 194 of females, producing an uncorrected death-rate of 49.4 per 1,000. Of these, however, 282 were non-parishioners. By the exclusion of this number from the statistics, and the addition of 22 deaths of parishioners occurring outside the district, a corrected total of 105 is produced, and a death-rate equal to 142 per 1,000, the lowest recorded daring the past seven years. Births and Birth Rate Deaths & Death Rate. 90 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Rate of Natural Increase The excess of births over deaths of parishioners numbered 85, being equal to 11*5 per 1,000 of the population. Table I. gives the number of births and deaths, birthrates and death.rates, and rates of natural increase during the past 8 years. TABLE I. Birth and Death Rates. Years. Births. Birth.Rates. Deaths from all causes. De ath.rates Rates of Natural Increase 1889 146 24.3 78 13.1 11.1 1890 168 26.2 109 18.6 7.9 1891 173 29.0 93 16.0 10.8 1892 164 31.0 131 24.8 6.2 1893 213 40.1 112 21.1 19.0 1894 149 26.2 103* 18.1* 8.1* 1895 197 31.5 115* 20.5* 11.0* 1896 190 2.57 105* 14.2* 11.5* *Corrected statistics. Deaths in Table II. classifies the deaths of parishioners institutions occurring in the various outlying public institutions of the Metropolis. 91 Parish of Tooting. TABLE II. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. TOOTING. 1896. Diseases Totals. Sex. Ages. Institutions. Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. Total under 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 to 65 years. 65 years A: upwards. Union Infirmary. General and Specia Hospitals. Asylums Hoard Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlatina 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Diphtheria ... Membranous .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fevers. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Continued .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Measles0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhoea and Dysentery .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Rheumatic Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Phthisis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Heart Disease 3 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 1 2 .. Injuries 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 2 .. All other Diseases 13 8 5 2 1 3 .. 1 5 4 6 7 .. Total 22 13 9 2 3 5 1 1 8 7 7 13 2 22 deaths were recorded, compared with 13 during the previous year. 7 of the deaths occurred in the Infirmary of the Wandsworth and Clapham Union, 13 in general and special hospitals within the Metropolis, and 2 in hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. Mortality within the Sub-district. Table III. gives the usual mortality statistics classified according to age, sex and social position, together with particulars of deaths in public institutions within the districts, both of parishioners and non-parishioners. TABLE III. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. TOOTING. Total Deaths from each Class of Disease, &c , in the Sub-District. Sex. Age. Social Position. Deaths in Public Institutions within the District. Population (Census) 1896, 7307 Mules. Females. Under 1 Year. From 1 to 5 Years. All under 5 years. From 5 to 15 Years. From 15 to 25 Years. From 25 and under 45 Years! From 45 to 6?> Years From to 7.") Years 75 Years and Upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Mer- chants, Bankers Ac. Middle and Trading Class. Industrial & Labouring Class. Estimated Population 7382 in middle0 of 1895 Parishioners. NonParishioners. CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet fever 94 48 46 5 60 65 27 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 88 .. 94 Diphtheria 176 75 101 7 103 110 63 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. 5 171 .. 176 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tvphus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cholera 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 11 5 6 3 8 11 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 10 .. 6 ii Constitutional. Whooping Cough 6 2 4 2 4 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5 .. 1 Influenza 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Diarrhoea & Dysentery 5 4 1 3 .. 3 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 4 .. .. Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Oilier Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals of Zymotic Class 295 135 160 20 175 195 90 4 5 .. .. 1 .. 1 14 280 .. 277 Gout and Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cancer & other Tumours 7 2 5 .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 4 .. 1 .. 3 3 .. 1 Other Constitutional Diseases 1 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 Phthisis Other Tubercular 10 6 4 .. .. .. .. 1 6 2 .. 1 1 .. 5 4 .. .. Diseases 2 .. 2 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. III. Local. Nervous 3 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. *2 .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. Circulatory 16 8 8 .. .. .. 1 2 3 5 2 3 1 4 3 8 .. .. Respiratory 13 10 3 6 4 10 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. 2 11 .. .. Digestive 8 3 5 3 1 4 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. 1 1 6 .. .. Urinary 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. Generative .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Locomotary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth, Low Vitality and 3 .. 3 3 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. Congenital Defects Old Age 4 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 .. 2 .. 2 .. .. v Violence 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. All Other Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 356 171 194 34 182 216 93 7 18 13 7 11 3 8 30 324 .. 281 * One of these was a Parishioner of Streatham. The following two tables, A and B, are inserted at the request of the medical officer of the Local Government Board to ensure a uniform method of classification over the entire Kingdom. The same information is given under different forms in the various other tables :— table TABLE OF DEATHS during the Year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary Sub-District of Tooting; classified according to Diseases ( A ) Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics: public institutions being shown as separate localities. {Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) Mortality from all causes, at subjoined ages. (i) Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria Membranous Croup. Typhus. Fevers. Puerperal. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhoea and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia,&c. Heart. Influenza. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) TOOTING 84 22 11 2 3 29 17 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 8 .. .. 10 .. .. 1 9 33 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 10 3 15 2 .. 18 51 FOUNTAIN FEVER HOSPITAL, Tooting 281 12 171 91 4 2 1 Under 5 .. 65 110 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 183 5 upwds .. 29 66 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 98 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 365 34 182 93 7 31 18 Under 6 .. 65 110 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 6 3 .. .. 10 .. .. 1 10 216 5 upwds .. 29 66 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. 10 3 16 2 .. 20 149 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the district among persons belonging thereto. 22 2 3 1 1 8 7 Under 5 .. 1 .. .. ..1 .. .. .. .. .. •• .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 5 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. 2 10 17 Deaths occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 282 12 171 91 4 3 1 Under 5 .. 65 110 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 183 5 upwds .. 29 66 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 3 99 94 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Infantile Mortality. The deaths of infants under one year of age (parishioners) numbered 24, being equal to to 126 per 1,000 births registered during the year. Senile Mortality. Fifteen of the deaths registered were of persons of the ages of seventy years and upwards, and they are here tabulated with classifications as to sex. TABLE IV. AGE. Males. Females. Total. At 70 and under 75 2 2 4 75 „ 80 3 4 7 80 „ 85 3 1 4 85 „ 90 .. .. .. 90 „ 95 .. .. .. 95 „ 100 .. .. .. Totals 8 7 15 social Position. The following indicates the proportion of deaths in the several social grades : Nobility and Gentry 3 = 0.8 per cent. Professional Classes 8 = 2.4 „ Middle and Trading Classes 30 = 8.2 „ Industrial and Labouring Classes 324 = 88.6 „ Total Deaths 365 10.0 inquests. Five deaths only were referred to the Coroner, compared with eighteen during the previous year. In two cases inquests were held with the following verdicts:— 95 Parish of Tooting. Natural Causes .. Cerebral-Haemorrhage 1 Violence:— Accidental Compression of brain due to a fall from bed 1 Total 2 Zymotic Mortality. The following is a comparative table of zymotic mortality during the last eight years: TABLE V. Zymotic Mortality. 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 6 1 .. 7 .. 9 2 11* Scarlet Fever 1 .. .. 1 18 52* 60* 94* Diphtheria .. .. .. .. .. .. 118* 176* Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. Whooping Cough 3 2 10 .. 5 3 1 6* Epidemic; Diarrhoea 1 3 .. 4 1 1 6 5 Other Zymotic Diseases, inincluding Influenza 1 2 4 1 4 65* 2 3 Total Deaths from Zymotic Class 12 9 14 13 31 131 189‡ 295* Zymotic Death-rate 2.4 1.6 2.0 2.4 5.0 5.l† 2.5† 2.8† Death-rate from all Causes 13.16 18.6 16.0 24.8 21.1 18.l† 20.5† 14.2† * Includes deaths of Non-Parishioners in Metropolitan Asylums Board Hospital (Fountain). See Table III. † Corrected Statistics. Prevalence of Infectious Disease. The following Table "B" classifies the cases of infectious disease notified and removed to Isolation Hospitals during the year. table TAliLE OF POPULATION, BIRTHS, AND OF NEW CASES OF INFECTIOUS SICKNESS, (B) coming to the knowledge of the Medical Officer of Health, during the year 1896, in the Metropolitan Sanitary Sub-District of Tooting ; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; Public Institutions being shown as separate localities. Population at all ages Registered Births. Aged under 5 or over 5. New Cases of Sickness in each Locality coming to the knowledge op the Medical Officer of Health. Number of such Cases Removed from their Homes in the several Localities fob tbjjatment in isolation hospital. Census 1891. Estimated to middle of 1895. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevebs. Cholera. Erysipelas. 1 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevebs Cholera. Erysipelas. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued J Relapsing. Puerperal. Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing. Puerperal. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) TOOTING 5784 7382 190 Under 5 ... 4 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... 27 7 ... ... 3 2 ... ... 1 12 ... 22 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Under 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 5784 7382 190 Under 5 ... 4 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 upwds ... 27 7 ... ... 8 2 ... ... 1 12 ... 22 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 97 Parish of Tooting. During the year sixty notifications of infectious disease were received :—of Scarlet Fever, thirty-one; Diphtheria, eleven; Enteric, three; Continued Fever, two; Cholera, one; and Erysipelas, twelve. Twentynine or nearly fifty per cent of the cases were removed to Isolation Hospitals. small pox. I am pleased to be again able to report that no case of this disease has occurred during the year in this district. scarlet Fever. The number of cases of Scarlet Fever is exactly equal to that occuring during the previous year (31). Except in seven instances where isolation could be effectually carried out at home, all the cases were removed to Hospital, where one death occurred. The prevalence of these diseases continues to be on the decrease, eleven cases occuring, compared with fifteen and twenty during the two previous years respectively. Four cases were removed to Hospital. No deaths of parishioners were recorded. cholera. A case of sudden illness and subsequent death was notified as being due to Cholera. Upon investigation, however, the case resolved itself into one of " English Cholera," and indicates the desirability of the Public Health Act, specifying " Asiatic Cholera " in the sections dealing with notification. Erysipelas. Twelve cases of Erysipelas were reported. This is in excess of previous years. Three cases of Enteric and two of Continued were notified, one of the former being removed to Hospital. H Diphtheria and Membranous Croup. Enteric and Continued Fever. 98 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Disinfection. Forty-four infected premises were subjected to disinfection during the year, the bedding being stoved in each instance. sanitary Eighty-one premises were inspected, and in operations, seventy-nine cases it was found necessary to serve notices to remedy sanitary defects. Nine houses were ordered to be closed as unfit for human habitation. Further details of the sanitary operations of the year are set out in Table XIII. of the combined Report. C. de LISLE BROCK, Medical Officer of Health for Tooting. WANDSWORTH. population. According to the Census taken in 1896, the population of the parish amounted to 58,101. The following particulars of this census (for which I am indebted to Mr. Howick, the Registrar,) are interesting, as showing the number of inhabitants in each ward, as also the proportion of males and females. Wards. Inhabited Houses. Empty. Occupied during day. Building. Males. Females. Total. Northfield 1,298 69 15 41 3,296 4,215 7,511 Southfield 1,410 71 10 80 3,722 4,948 8,670 Fairfield 1,868 37 13 7 5,849 5,968 11,817 Heath field 1,448 44 5 84 3,972 4,551 8,523 Earlsfield 1,580 91 13 28 5,226 5,539 10,765 Springfield 1,402 89 8 28 5,218 5,597 10,815 Totals 9,006 401 64 268 27,283 30,818 58,101 The population of the public institutions in the parish was as follows :— males. females. Total. Hospital for Incurables 39 252 291 Boys' Home 190 8 198 Workhouse 430 322 752 Lnnatic Asylum 541 755 1296 Prison 991 2 993 Patriotic Asylum — 316 316 St. Peter's Hospital — — 60 Total •• •• 3,906 H 2 100 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The estimated population, in the middle of 1896, calculated from the above, amounted to 58,698. By subtracting the population of the institutions in the parish from this, viz : 3,906, we get the corrected population, 54,792. The number of persons per inhabited house, calculated from the foregoing table, is 6, and is 1 above the number at the census of 1891. In 1891, the population was 46,720, or, after deducting the public institutions, 43,209, the total increase of population in the quinquennium being 10,986, Births and During the 53 weeks ending the 2nd Janu Birth-rate. ary 1897, which comprise the registration year, 1,754 births, 877 of males and 877 of females, were registered, a total increase of 72, compared with the year 1895. The corrected decennial average was 1,909. 158 births took place in the workhouse, of which 57 belonged to this sub-district, 63 to Battersea, 16 to Clapham, 15 to Streatham, 5 to Tooting, and 2 to Putney. The birth-rate was 31.41 per 1,000, an increase of .47 per 1000 compared with 1895. After deducting the number of births which occurred in the workhouse, of children whose mothers belonged to other districts, the birth-rate was 29.6 per 1,000. The rate of natural increase, or the excess of births over deaths, was 18.06 per 1,000. Deaths and During the year, 886 deaths were registered, Death-rate. 439 of males and 437 of females, an increase of 88 as compared with 1895, but 51 less than the corrected decennial average. The death-rate was 14.82 per 1,000, an increase of 1.03 compared with 1895, but 2.25 less than the decennial average. 101 Parish of Wandsworth. To arrive at the corrected death.rate the number of deaths in the various public institutions in the parish have to be deducted. The number of these deaths was 140, compared with 135 in 1895. Of these 140 deaths, 108 occurred in the Middlesex Lunatic Asylum, 9 in the Royal Hospital for Incurables, 5 in St. Peter's Hospital, 7 in the Prison, 1 in the Cottage Home, and 10 in the Workhouse No death occurred in the Boy's Home, or in the Patriotic Asylum for Girls, during the year. The Cottage Home was closed in the beginning of the year. Five deaths of persons belonging to other districts have also to be deducted, making a further total of 145. The corrected death.rate calculated from the above was 13.35 per 1,000, an increase of 1.12 compared with 1895. The decennial average was 14.69 per 1000. Table I. shows the births, birth.rate, deaths from all causes, the corrected and uncorrected death.rate, and the rate of natural increase for the year as well as for the decennium preceding. TABLE I. Birth and Death.Rates. Years. Births. Birth.rate. *Deaths from all causes. Death.rate. Rate of Natural Increase. Corrected. Uncorrected. 1886 1255 40.40 722 19.05 22.33 21.35 1887 1338 41.96 610 15.58 18.40 24.59 1888 1451 44.36 711 18.07 20.90 21.78 1889 1415 42.20 494 11.18 14.79 24.51 1890 1412 32.74 787 15.95 17.37 16.79 1891 1597 35.48 780 14.48 16.53 21.00 1892 1535 32.55 838 15.21 17.09 17.34 1893 1606 31.95 820 13.60 15.63 18.35 1894 1628 32.59 768 11.63 13.91 20.96 1895 1682 30.94 798 12.23 13.79 18.71 1896 1754 3.41 886 13.35 14.82 18.06 * Deaths in Outlying Institutions not included. 102 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. To ascertain the true death-rate, the number of deaths outside the district among persons belonging thereto must be added. The total number of these deaths was 205, an increase of 14, compared with 1895. 134 of these deaths occurred in the Union Infirmary, 51 in general and special hospitals, and 20 in the various hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. Table II. shows the number of deaths in these institutions from all causes, from zymotic diseases, and from various groups of diseases, arranged as to age periods in the grouping required by the Local Government Board. 103 Parish of Wandsworth. TABLE II. Deaths in Out-lying Institutions. WANDSWORTH. 1896. Diseases. Totals. Sex. Ages. Institutions. Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. Total under 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 to 65 years. 65 years & upwards. Union Infirmary. General and Special Hospitals. Asylum Board Hospitals. Influenza 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Small pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlatina 12 7 5 .. 9 9 2 1 .. .. .. .. 12 Diphtheria 4 3 1 .. 3 3 1 .. .. .. .. 1 3 Membranous Croup .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fevers. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Continued .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 2 .. .. Measles 6 6 .. 1 5 6 .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. Whooping Cough 2 1 1 .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. Diarrhoea and Dysuntry 9 4 5 7 2 9 .. .. .. .. 8 1 .. Rheumatic Fever 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. Ague .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .. Phthisis 18 15 3 .. .. .. .. .. 15 3 14 3 1 Bronchitis, Pneumonia and 29 12 17 2 .. 2 .. 1 11 15 25 4 .. Pleurisy Heart Disease 26 10 16 .. .. .. .. 3 6 17 22 3 1 Injuries ..3 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 1 2 .. All other Diseases 91 44 47 14 5 19 1 4 33 34 54 35 2 Totals 206 109 96 24 26 50 4 9 69 73 134 51 20 104 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The total number of deaths after these corrections have been made was 946, an increase of 92 compared with the corrected total in 1895. The death-rate calculated from this was 16.94 per 1,000 compared with 15.76 per 1,000 in 1895, 14.93 per 1,000 in 1894, and 18.43 per 1,000 in 1893. The death-rate for the whole metropolis for the year 1896 was 18.2 per 1,000, or 1.26 per 1,000 above the rate for this sub-district. Table III. shows the statistics of mortality for the year. It shows the number of deaths, the causes of death, and the age, sex, and social position of the deceased. Tables A and B are inserted by direction of the Local Government Board. In Table III. the causes of death are classified in six main groups, and the total number of deaths in each group, as well as the percentage to total deaths, were as follows:— 1. Zymotic 181 deaths or 20.43 per cent. of total deaths. 2. Constitutional 156 „ 17.61 „ „ „ 3. Local 397 „ 44.81 „ „ „ 4. Developmental 123 „ 13.88 „ „ „ 5. Violence 29 „ 3.27 „ „ „ 6. Ill-defined 0 „ 0 „ „ „ TABLE III. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. WANDSWORTH. Total Deaths from each Class of Disease. &c., in the Sub-District. Sex. Age. Social Position. Males. Females Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. From 25 and under 45 years. From 45 and under 65 years. From 65 and under 75 years. 75 and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class. Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class. Shopmen, Clerks, &c. Industrial and Labouring Classes. Population (Census), 1896 58,101 Estimated Population in middle of 1896 58,698 CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 3 1 2 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 Diphtheria 8 4 4 1 5 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 5 Membranous Croup 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 4 4 .. .. .. .. 2 2 .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Relapsing Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Erysipelas 3 1 2 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. 1 2 Measles 58 22 36 12 44 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 56 Whooping Cough 53 26 27 23 29 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 9 42 Influenza 6 3 3 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 3 1 .. .. 2 4 Diarrhœa & Dysentery 44 13 31 35 7 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. 9 35 Hydrophobia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals of Zymotic Class 181 74 107 73 89 6 3 2 2 4 2 1 3 28 149 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 11 4 7 .. 2 .. .. 4 1 4 .. 1 1 4 5 Cancer & other Tumoure 43 18 25 .. 2 .. .. 4 20 14 3 3 2 12 26 Otber Constitutional Diseases 13 6 7 3 1 .. 2 2 2 3 .. .. .. 9 4 Tubercular. Phthisis 58 30 28 .. 1 3 13 30 10 1 .. 3 5 14 36 Other Tubercular Diseases 31 13 18 14 11 3 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. 10 21 III. Local. Nervous 84 57 27 16 3 3 4 26 17 8 7 1 5 18 60 Circulatory 89 43 46 2 2 4 2 10 27 24 18 7 9 30 43 Respiratory 122 67 55 30 24 1 2 9 23 17 16 2 5 30 85 Digestive 72 30 42 35 6 2 .. 8 13 6 2 1 5 22 44 Urinary 21 13 8 .. .. .. .. 4 9 5 3 2 .. 8 11 Generative 8 .. 8 .. .. .. .. 8 .. .. .. .. .. 2 6 Locomotary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Integumentary 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 65 39 26 66 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 12 51 Congenital Defects 6 4 2 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5 Old Age 52 20 32 .. .. .. .. .. 3 16 33 2 4 9 37 V. Violence 29 21 8 6 4 .. 2 8 7 1 1 .. .. 6 23 VI. Ill-defined & not Specified Ill-defined .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Not specified .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 886 439 447 251 145 22 29 116 135 103 85 24 40 215 607 TABLE TABLE OF DEATHS during the year 1896, in the Wandsworth Sub-District of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of (A) Wandsworth; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. Mortality from all causes, at subjoined Ages. (i) Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Influenza. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. (Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) (a) Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing Puerperal. (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) Middlesex Lunatic Asylum 108 .. .. 3 3 67 35 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 8 4 .. 1 81 108 Royal Hospital for Incurables 9 .. .. .. .. 3 6 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 3 .. .. 3 9 St. Peter's Hospital 5 .. .. .. .. .. 5 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. 2 5 The Prison 7 .. .. .. 1 5 1 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 3 1 7 The Cottage Home 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Patriotic Asylum for Girls .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. The Boys' Home .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. The Workhouse 10 5 .. .. .. 1 4 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 .. .. .. 5 Rest of the Sub-District 746 246 145 19 25 175 136 Under 5 .. 3 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 56 52 42 2 1 54 4 1 10 158 391 5 upwds .. .. 2 .. .. 4 .. .. 1 .. 2 2 1 2 7 42 56 71 5 15 145 355 Totals 886 251 145 22 29 251 188 Under 5 .. 3 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 56 52 42 2 1 54 4 1 10 163 396 5 upwds .. .. 2 .. .. 4 .. .. 1 .. 2 2 1 2 9 57 68 85 5 19 233 490 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the division or district among persons belonging thereto. 205 24 26 4 9 69 Under 5 .. 9 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 2 9 .. .. 2 .. .. .. 19 50 5 upwds .. 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 18 27 26 1 3 72 155 Deaths occurring within the division or trict among persons not belonging thereto. 145 6 .. 3 6 78 52 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5 6 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 15 12 15 .. 7 88 139 TABLE TABLE OF DEATHS during the year 1896, in the Wandsworth Sub-District of theMetropolitan Sanitary District of (A) Wandsworth; classified according to Diseases, Ages, and Localities. Names of Localities adopted for the purpose of these Statistics; public institutions being shown as separate localities. Mortality from all causes, at subjoined ages. (i) Mortality from subjoined causes, distinguishing Deaths of Children under Five Years of Age. At all Ages. Under 1 year. 1 and under 5. 5 and under 15. 15 and under 25. 25 and under 65. 65 and upwards. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Smallpox. Scarlatina. Diphtheria. Membranous Croup. Fevers. Cholera. Erysipelas. Measles. Whooping Cough. Diarrhœa and Dysentery. Rheumatic Fever. Phthisis. Bronchitis, Pneumonia and Pleurisy. Heart Disease. Influenza. Injuries. All other Diseases. Total. (Columns for Population and Births are in Table B.) (a) Typhus. Enteric or Typhoid. Continued. Relapsing Puerperal. (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) Middlesex Lunatic Asylum 108 .. .. 3 3 67 35 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 8 4 .. 1 81 108 Royal Hospital for Incurables 9 .. .. .. .. 3 6 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 3 .. .. 3 9 St. Peter's Hospital 5 .. .. .. .. .. 5 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. 2 5 The Prison 7 .. .. .. 1 5 1 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 3 1 7 The Cottage Home 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 Patriotic Asylum for Girls .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. The Boys' Home .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. The Workhouse 10 5 .. .. .. 1 4 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 5 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 .. .. .. 5 Rest of the Sub-District 746 246 145 19 25 175 136 Under 5 .. 3 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 56 52 42 2 1 54 4 1 10 158 391 5 upwds .. .. 2 .. .. 4 .. .. 1 .. 2 2 1 2 7 42 56 71 5 15 145 355 Totals 880 251 145 22 29 251 188 Under 5 .. 3 6 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 56 52 42 2 1 54 4 1 10 163 396 5 upwds .. .. 2 .. .. 4 .. .. 1 .. 2 2 1 2 9 57 68 85 5 19 233 490 The subjoined numbers have also to be taken into account in judging of the above records of mortality. Deaths occurring outside the division or district among persons belonging thereto. 205 24 26 4 9 69 73 Under 5 .. 9 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 2 9 .. .. 2 .. .. .. 19 50 5 upwds .. 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 18 27 26 1 3 72 155 Deaths occurring within the division or trict among persons not belonging thereto. 145 6 .. 3 6 78 52 Under 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. l 5 6 5 upwds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 15 12 15 .. 7 88 139 108 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Zymotic Diseases. During the year there were registered 181 deaths from the above diseases, compared with 94 in 1895. This is 34.6 above the decennial average corrected for increase of population, and is wholly due to the large mortality from measles, whooping cough, and diarrhoea, which occurred during the year. The number of deaths which occurred from the notifiable diseases, viz. scarlet fever, diphtheria, membranous croup, typhoid fever, puerperal fever and erysipelas, was 20, compared with 19 in 1895. Table IV. shows the total deaths from the seven principal zymotic diseases, the total deaths from all zymotic diseases, the zymotic death-rate per 1,000, the total deaths from all causes, and the percentage of deaths from epidemic diseases to deaths from all causes for the year, as well as for the 10 preceding years. The number above or below the corrected decennial average is also given. Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. 109 TABLE IV. Comparative Table of Zymotic Mortality. Diseases. 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1896 No. above corrected ave rage. No. below corrected average. Seven principal Epidemic Diseases. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 28 20 39 7 47 10 30 2 37 2 58 29.59 .. Scarlet Fever 6 1 4 .. .. 2 5 3 1 .. 3 .49 .. Diphtheria 10 2 5 6 10 19 20 20 8 3 8 .. 5.1 Fever Typhus Enteric 8 6 5 4 5 5 3 6 5 4 4 .. 2.5 Whooping Cough 31 8 40 6 35 18 28 26 17 13 53 24.59 .. Diarrhœa Cholera 28 30 32 21 37 25 41 37 24 24 44 4.73 .. Total Deaths from above Epidemic Diseases 111 67 125 44 134 79 127 94 92 46 170 52.4 .. Other Zymotic Diseases 5 4 2 3 11 16 60 34 34 58 *11 .. 18 Total Deaths from Zymotic Diseases 116 71 127 47 145 95 187 128 126 94 181 34.6 .. Zymotic Death rate per 1,000 population 3.58 2.14 3.73 1.35 3.2 2 3.7 2.54 2.30 1.62 3.02 .41 .. Total Deaths from all causes 722 610 711 494 787 780 838 820 768 798 886 .. 95 Percentage of Deaths from Epidemics to De aths from all causes . 15.3 10.9 17.5 8.90 17.0 10.3 15.1 15.62 16.5 11.78 20.42 6.53 .. * Inclusive of 6 from Influenza. The death-rate from all zymotic diseases per 1,000 of population was 3.02; an increase of 1.40 compared with 1895, and .41 above the corrected decennial average. Measles and whooping cough alone show a death-rate of 1.98 per 1,000. 110 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. To ascertain the true zymotic death-rate, the number of deaths from all zymotic diseases in outlying institutions must be added. In these 37 deaths occurred, 17 in the Union infirmary, 4 in general or special hospitals, and 16 in the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. In internal institutions there were no deaths from zymotic diseases during the year. The total number, after adding the above deaths was 218, compared with 110 in 1895, and 140 in 1894. The true zymotic death-rate is thus 3.96 per 1,000, compared with 2.03 in 1895 and 2.64 in 1894. The annual rate per 1,000 persons living for the whole of London for the year, exclusive of influenza, was 3.1, while for this parish the corresponding rate was 3.94 per 1,000. This high mortality is, as already mentioned, due to the large number of deaths from measles and whooping cough. Small Pox. No deaths occurred from this disease, and no notifications were received during the year. The official return of the vaccination officer for the year 1895 shows that of 1,679 births registered from 1st January to 31st December, 1,328, or 79 per cent. were successfully vaccinated, 14 were certified as being insusceptible of vaccination, 146 died unvaccinated, 38 were postponed by medical certificate, 24 had removed to districts the vaccination officer of which had been duly apprised, 62 had removed to places unknown, and 67 remained on the books as unvaccinated. Scarlet Fever. 400 cases of this disease were notified, compared with 184 in 1895, and 133 in 1894. 199 of these cases were removed to hospital, where 12 deaths occurred, whereas of the 201 cases treated at home only three proved fatal. The total case mortality was 3.75 per Pariah of Wandsworth. 111 cent, compared with 1.63 in 1895, and 2.25 in 1894. This shows that the type of disease was more severe than in previous years. The mortality of hospital treated cases was 6.03 per cent., and of those treated at home 1.44 per cent. This great difference in mortality is to be explained by the fact that the milder cases were more frequently kept at home while the graver cases were sent to hospital. The total case mortality for the whole of the Metropolis for the year 1896 was 3.66 per cent. The maximum number of notifications was received in the month of October, when 51 cases were notified, and the minimum in February when 18 were notified. The large increase of scarlet fever was general all over the Metropolis, and owing to this, some difficulty was occasionally experienced in having the cases removed to hospital as no beds were available. During the year 1896, the proportion of persons reported to be suffering from scarlet lever in London was equal to 5.6 per 1,100 of population, while in this sub-district the proportion was 6.8. During the month of March several cases occurred in No. 1 Ward in children attending the infant department of the Board School there, and there was reason to think that infection was being spread by a case which had not been notified. I communicated the particulars to the medical officer of the School Board suggesting that the infant department of the above school should be closed for 14 days. He accordingly advised the school to be closed from March 27th to the 13th April, with beneficial results. 112 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. The death-rate per 1,000 from scarlet fever was .25 compared with .21 in the whole Metropolis, and .18 in England and Wales for the year 1896. Diphtheria. 98 notifications were received during the year, an increase of 38 compared with 1895. 33 of these were removed to hospital, where 4 deaths occurred, while of the remaining 65 treated at home, 8 proved fatal, the total deaths being 12 compared with 6 in 1895. The total case mortality was 12.2 per cent. compared with 10 per cent. in 1895. The case mortality of home treated cases was 12.3 per cent., and that of hospital treated cases 12.1 per cent., reversing the order that obtained in 1895, when the hospital treated cases showed a higher case mortality. Diphtheria was increasingly prevalent in London during 1890, the proportion notified per 1,000 of population being 3.1, while for this sub-district the proportion per 1,000 was (inclusive in both cases of membranous croup) only 1.7. Membranous Croup. Only two notifications of this were received, and one death resulted, a percentage of 50. Most cases of membranous croup are now notified as diphtheria and that accounts for the small number of notifications received under this head. Laryngeal diphtheria has a higher case mortality than other forms, and the transference of most of the cases to diphtheria would therefore raise the mortality of the latter. The total case mortality of the two combined for the year was 13 per cent., which compares favourably with former years, viz.:—15.5 per cent. in 1895, and 17 per cent. in 1894. For the whole of London the case mortality for the year was 19.2 per cent, compared with Parish of Wandsworth. 113 20.4 per cent. in 1895. This lessened mortality is to some extent due to the anti-toxic serum treatment, which is now so extensively used in cases of diphtheria, both in hospital and in general practice. Enteric Fever. 22 cases were notified, compared with 47 in 1895. Of these 22, 3 were removed to hospital, and none of these were fatal, while of the remaining 19 treated at home 4 died. As regards the proportion of notified cases to the population, this sub-district compares favourably with the rest of the Metropolis, in the former the proportion being .37 per 1,000, while in the latter there was .72 per 1,000. In 2 of the cases notified the infection was definitely traced to eating of oysters. In 1 the probable cause of infection was ice cream, and in 5 the sanitary arrangements of the house were found, on testing, to be defective. In 4 others the disease was contracted outside the district, while in the remaining 10 no definite source of infection could be traced. The annual death-rate per 1,000 from fever in England and Wales for the year was .17, in the Metropolis .12, and in this sub-district .06. Puerperal Fever. Seven cases were notified, and of these 1 proved fatal, compared with 4 fatal cases in 1895. Erysipelas. 116 cases were notified with 5 deaths, compared with 129 notifications with 4 deaths in 1895. 2 of the cases were removed to the Union Infirmary, and both proved fatal. Measles. This disease and whooping cough were present in epidemic form during the first half of the year. 1 114 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. As those diseases are not notifiable, their presence in the parish does not as a rule come under my notice until a death occurs, and all the following statistics are compiled from these death-returns. The first death from measles was registered during the week ending January 25th, and occurred in Ward 3. During the month of February, 4 deaths were registered; in March, 3; in April, 12; in May, 27; in June, 10; and in July, 2; making a total of 58, this being 29.59 above the decennial average corrected for increase of population. No deaths occurred after the first week in July from this disease. The distribution of these deaths in the different wards of the parish was as follows: Ward I. 5, Ward II. 12, Ward III. 15, Ward IV. 5, Ward V. 15, and Ward VI. 6. The public schools were, as is usually the case, the principal means of spreading the disease, and I advised that the infant department of the schools chiefly affected should be closed for a period of three weeks. The infant's department of Waldron Road, Garratt Lane, and Swaffield Road Schools were closed from the 14th of May to the 8th of June, and the same department of Eltringham Street School from May 22nd to June 15th. Standard I. department of the latter school was also closed from 29th May to 15th June. These measures seemed to have a beneficial effect, as only 3 deaths occurred after the 10th of June. Six deaths occurred from measles in external institutions, making a total death roll of 64. The death rate per 1,000 from this disease was 1.09, compared with .83 in the Metropolis, and .56 in England and Wales. Whooping Cough. This disease was also exceptionally prevalent during the year as no fewer than 53 deaths were Parish of Wandsworth. 115 tered from it, as well as 2 in external institutions, making a total death-roll of 55. Of the 53 deaths in the subdistrict, 48 occurred during the same period as the deaths from measles, the other 5 occurring at varying intervals during the rest of the year. Unlike measles, which did not appear on the death-returns till the week ending January 25th, whooping cough appeared in the returns of the closing weeks of 1895, and continued to prevail till July, 1896. During the month of January, 6 deaths were registered, in February, 14; in March, 4; in April, 14; in May, 7; in June, 5; and in the first week of July, 1. The total deaths are 24.59 above the corrected decennial average. The distribution of the deaths in the different wards of the parish was as follows: Ward I. 0, Ward II. 6, Ward III. 20, Ward IV. 13, Ward V. 6, and Ward VI. 3. All the deaths, with the exception of one, occurred among children under five years of age. The death-rate per 1,000 in this sub-district was .93, in the Metropolis, .66, and in England and Wales. .41. The deaths from these two diseases alone amounted to 111, or, with the addition of those in outside institutions, 119, and were the cause of 12.5 per cent. of the total deaths, and 51.1 per cent. of the zymotic deaths. For the next two years we may expect to be fairly free from these diseases, more especially from measles, as the great majority of susceptible children must have suffered from them during the epidemic. Short of notication and isolation, only two things can be advised, the first being the early closure of all schools, public and private, and the next and perhaps the more important, the better education of the parents in realising that 12 116 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. measles if cared for is not a very fatal disease as a rule, but, if neglected, may become exceedingly so. The following are the death-rates per 1,000 of population from zymotic diseases, inclusive of deaths in outlying institutions for the years 1894, 1895, and 1896. Death-rate per 1000. 1894 1895 1896 Diarrhœa .452 .449 .949 Diphtheria and Croup .396 .190 .233 Whooping Cough .339 .242 .984 Scarlet Fever .056 .051 .268 Influenza .245 .674 .125 Enteric Fever .112 .121 .073 Measles .754 .051 1.146 Enteric fever is the only zymotic that shows a decrease, although scarlet fever and diphtheria only show a slight increase compared with 1895. Diarrhœa. This disease also showed a high mortality during the year, 44 deaths having been registered as occurring from it. 9 deaths also occurred in outside institutions. This was 4.73 above the corrected decennial average. The rate per 1,000 was thus .9; while in London the rate was .72, and in England and Wales .55. 41 of these deaths occurred in children under one year. Influenza. Only 7 deaths were registered from this, one of these being in an outside institution; this is the smallest number of deaths since the disease appeared in 1891. These numbers were as follows: in 1892, 44; in 1893, 14; in 1894, 13; and in 1895, 39. Parish of Wandsworth. 117 Notification of Infectious Diseases. During 1896, 654 cases of infectious disease were notified, an increase of 109 compared with 1895. In 1892, 588, in 1893, 868, and in 1894, 444 cases were notified. Scarlet fever shows a considerable increase over 1895, but a decrease compared with 1893, the last year that this disease was present as an epidemic. The increase in diphtheria and croup is not so marked, 100 cases having been notified in 1896 compared with 71 in 1895. In 1893, 151 cases were notified, and in 1894, 110. The annual rate for these notifiable diseases per 1,000 persons living was, in this parish, 11.1 compared with 7.6 in 1895. For the whole Metropolis for the year 1895 the rate was also 11.1 compared with 9.5 in 1895. The death-rate per 1,000 from these notifiable diseases was only .66, while lor the whole of the Metropolis this rate was .72. The total number of deaths was 39, 19 of these occurring in hospital and 20 at home, compared with 31 in 1895. This was equal to 5 9 per cent. of the cases notified, compared with 6.9 in 1895,10.36 in 1894, and 8.8 in 1893. The number of the several diseases, the number sent to hospital, and the number of deaths in hospital and at home are shown in the following table:— 118 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. TABLE VI. Notification of Infectious Diseases. DISEASE. No. cases notified. No. patients removed to Hospital. No. died in Hospital. No. died at Home. Total deaths in Hospital and at Home. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. Scarlatina 400 199 12 3 15 Erysipelas 116 2 2 3 5 Diphtheria 98 33 4 8 12 Membranous Croup 2 .. .. 1 1 Enteric Fever 22 3 .. 4 4 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever 7 1 1 1 2 Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. Cholera .. .. .. .. .. Total 654 235 19 20 39 16 cases of scarlet fever, 1 of diphtheria, and 4 of erysipelas occurred in the Middlesex Lunatic Asylum, 1 case of typhoid fever in the prison, 1 case of scarlet fever in the Patriotic Asylum for Girls, and 3 cases of scarlet fever, 3 of puerperal fever, and 17 of erysipelas in the workhouse, a total of 46. Parish of Wandsworth. 119 Table VII. shows the prevalence of these diseases for each month during the year 1896. TABLE VII. Monthly Notifications of Infectious Diseases. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Small pox 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Diphtheria 5 5 11 5 6 6 12 11 5 15 8 9 Membranous Croup 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Scarlet Fever 19 18 27 38 22 27 45 32 36 51 48 37 Enteric Fever 4 0 3 1 2 0 1 6 2 2 2 0 Erysipelas 15 7 10 2 11 6 8 17 12 10 8 10 Return Cases of Scarlet Fever. During the year several cases of scarlet fever occurred in families in which the infection was in all probability derived from a case sent back from hospital as free from infection. The following are particulars of these cases:— (1).—Patient was removed to hospital on November 16th, 1895, and returned home on January 28th, 1896. She slept with her sister after returning on February 4th, and this sister was notified as having scarlet fever on the 6th February. (2).—First case was reported on August 10th, was removed to hospital on the 13th, and returned home on October 28th. A second case was notified on the 4th November, and a third on 13th November. (3).—Case notified March 9th, removed same day, and returned home on July 2nd, second case notified July the 9th. (4).—Case returned from Gore Farm, Oct. 3rd. Se 120 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. cond case notified October 14th, and third case on 17th. In this case the period between the return and the notification is longer than in the previous cases, but no other source of infection could be traced. (5).—Case notified April 8th, removed to hospital the day previous, returned home on September 8th. Second case notified September 16th, third case on September 29th, and fourth case October 12th. (6).—Case notified September 19th, removed to hospital on the 23rd, and returned home on November 25th. Second and third cases notified December 1st. Non-Zymotic Diseases. Table VIII. shows the number of deaths from the above for the year as well as for the ten years preceding. The number above and below the decennial average corrected for increase of population is also given. Parish of Wandsworth. 121 TABLE VIII. Comparative Table of Non-Zymotic Mortality. Diseases. 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1896 No. above corrected average. No. below corrected average. Constitutional. Tubercular 87 111 114 72 99 107 87 79 97 121 89 • • 37 Other Constitutional 30 32 30 32 48 31 54 36 51 34 67 16.7 •• Local. Nervous 151 115 112 90 103 104 123 110 111 122 84 • • 66 Circulatory 46 32 45 26 46 39 57 57 52 51 89 28.3 .. Respiratory 135 110 128 87 177 201 144 184 128 140 122 • • 63 Digestive 30 30 34 31 42 51 34 62 51 56 72 15.2 • • Urinary 26 17 22 17 17 22 36 28 24 22 21 • • 8.5 Generative 4 2 5 5 6 9 9 6 9 5 8 .3 • • Locomotory .. 1 .. 2 2 2 • • • • • • • • • • • • .89 Integumentary .. .. 1 .. 1 • • 1 • • • • • • 1 .5 •• Developmental. Premature Birth Malformation Low Vitality 45 38 41 36 54 66 60 72 58 82 71 •• .65 Age 32 36 25 33 24 27 26 29 38 53 52 10 •• Violence 17 13 23 15 27 24 18 25 23 17 29 3.1 • • Ill-defined or Not specified 3 2 4 1 2 2 2 4 •• 1 •• •• 2.6 The above were the cause of 705 deaths compared with 704 last year. They formed 79.5 per cent. of the total mortality compared with 88.23 per cent. in 1895, and 83.59 in 1894. Tubercular diseases were the cause of 89 deaths, while in 1895 the number of deaths from these was 121. The decennial average corrected for increase of population was 126, so that in 1896 the number of deaths was 37 below the average. The number of deaths in internal institutions was 16, and in external institutions, of persons belonging to 122 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. the parish, 24, so that the corrected total was 97. Of these 97, 61 died from phthisis pulmonalis, compared with 78 in 1895 and 75 in 1894. The total death-rate from tubercular diseases for the year was 1.73 per 1,000, compared with 2.09 in 1895, and 2.43 in England and Wales during the decennium 1881-90. From phthisis pulmonalis alone the death-rate was 1.09 per 1,000 compared with 1.35 in 1895, and 1.73 in England and Wales during the decennium 1881-90. Other tubercular diseases (including tabes mesenterica and tubercular meningitis) were the cause of 36 deaths, a decrease of 16 compared with 1895. Of these 36 deaths 14 were of infants under one year, and 14 of children from one to five years. Other constitutional diseases, as gout, rheumatism and cancer, were the cause of 67 deaths. Nine deaths from these diseases occurred in internal and 27 in external institutions, making a corrected total of 85. Cancer alone was the cause of 57 of these deaths, a large increase compared with 1895, when only 26 deaths occurred. Of these 57 deaths, 26 were of males and 31 of females. Diseases of the organs of respiration were the cause of 122 deaths, 18 fewer than last year, and 63 below the corrected decennial average. Eight deaths from these diseases occurred in the Middlesex Lunatic Asylum, 1 in the Hospital for Incurables, 1 in St. Peter's Hospital, 1 in the Prison, and 1 in the Workhouse, a total of 12. 29 deaths also occurred in external institutions, making a corrected total of 139, while in 1895 the corrected total was 156. Parish of Wandsworth. 123 Diseases of the brain and nervous system were the cause of 84 deaths, 66 below the corrected average. 42 of these deaths, or 50 per cent. occurred in the Middlesex Lunatic Asylum, and 1 in the Workhouse. 16 deaths occurred in external institutions, making a corrected total of 57 compared with 96 in 1895. Prom diseases of the organs of circulation 89 deaths occurred, 38 more than occurred in 1896, and 28.3 above the corrected average. 15 deaths from these diseases occurred in internal and 26 in external institutions, the corrected total being 100 compared with 65 in 1895. Diseases of the digestive organs were the cause of 72 deaths, 16 above last year, and 15.2 above the corrected decennial average. 40 or 55 per cent. of these deaths occurred in infants under one year, and 47 or 65.2 per cent. under five years. Prom diseases of the urinary organs, 21 deaths occurred, one less than last year, and 8.5 below the corrected average. Seven deaths from these diseases occurred in internal and nine in external institutions, the corrected total being 23. Prom premature birth, low vitality, and congenital defects, 71 deaths occurred, 11 less than last year, and .65 less than the corrected average. 3 of these deaths occurred in internal and 6 in external institutions, making a corrected total of 74. All the deaths were of infants under one year. 52 deaths, 20 of males and 32 of females, occurred from old age, one less than last year, but 10 above the 124 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. eorrected average. 20 of these deaths occurred in the Middlesex Lunatic Asylum, 1 in the Cottage Home, and 1 in St. Peter's Hospital. In external institutions, 10 deaths occurred in the Union Infirmary, the corrected total being 40. Erom violence, 29 deaths occurred, 1 of these being in the Union Infirmary, and 3 in the Prison. Two adults belonging to other parishes were found drowned in the river Thames, one adult was killed at the Electric Lighting station, and one child accidentally suffocated. In outlying institutions 3 deaths occurred, making the corrected total 24. infantile 251 deaths of infants under one year were Mortality, registered, 6 of these occurring within the district among persons not belonging thereto. 24 deaths occurred in external institutions, making a corrected total of 269. In 1895 the uncorrected total was 232 and the corrected 237. The percentage of these deaths to the total mortality was, uncorrected 28.3, and corrected 36*03. Calculated from the number of registered births during the year, viz., 1,754, the infantile mortality was 143, compared with 137.9 in 1895, and 121 per 1,000 in 1894. The corrected infantile mortality was 158 per 1,000 registered births, compared with 140 in 1895. The cause of this increase was the large mortality from measles and whooping cough. In 1896 for the whole Metropolis the death-rate was 160 per 1,000 registered births, while for the 33 125 Parish of Wandsworth. great towns the number was 167. In England and Wales generally the death-rate was 148 per 1,000. 73 of these deaths occurred from diseases of the zymotic class, compared with 41 in 1895, this increase being due to the large number of deaths irom diarrhoea and whooping cough. Diseases of the respiratory organs, of the digestive organs, and premature birth and low vitality were the cause of the great majority of deaths in the non-zymotic class. Senile Mortality. The total number of deaths over 70 years was (including the deaths of parishioners in outlying institutions) 155, an increase of 45 compared with 1895. Table IX. shows the number of deaths at 70 years and upwards. TABLE IX. Age. Males. Females. Total. At 70 and under 75 28 31 59 75 „ „ 80 23 26 49 80 „ „ 85 8 22 30 85 „ „ 90 5 8 13 90 ,, „ 95 0 4 4 64 91 155 Table X. shows the percentage to total deaths, as well as to diseases of the zymotic class, compared with the decennial average, according to social position. On account of the prevalence of measles and whooping cough during the year the mortality that occurred from zymotic diseases is seen to have been greatest among 126 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. the industrial and labouring classes. The total mortality, however, amongst these was only slightly above the decennial average. The percentage of deaths from zymotics among the other three classes is much under the decennial average. TABLE X. Social Position. Total Deaths. Deaths from Zymotic Diseases. 1896. Decennial average. 1896. Decennial Average. Nobility and Gentry 2.71 3.24 0.55 1.38 Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c 4.52 5.67 1.66 5.03 Middle and Trading Classes, Clerks. &c. 24.26 25.47 15.47 20.13 Industrial and Labouring Classes 68.51 65.62 82.32 73.46 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 inquests. During the year 75 inquests were held, an increase of 29 compared with 1895. Of these, 50 were males compared with 29 last year, and 25 females compared with 17. The following table represents the verdicts returned and the numbers and sex of deceased: TABLE XI. Males. Females. Total. Deaths from Natural Causes 27 16 43 Suicidal Revolver shot, wound in head 1 — 1 Strangulation with handkerchief 1 — 1 Hanging with Cord 1 — 1 Poisoning by Phosphorus — 1 1 127 Parish of Wandsworth. Accidental Suffocation in bed with with parents Males. Females. Total. 3 2 5 Asphyxia by drowning 3 — 3 Blood Poisoning 1 — 1 Fracture of Skull 2 1 3 Suffocation — 1 1 Gastritis from Eating Shellfish — 1 1 Burns 1 1 2 Poisoning by Ckloiodyne 1 — 1 „ Belladonna 1 — 1 Falls 2 — 2 Asphyxia from Noxious Vapours 1 — 1 Erysipelas after Burns 1 — 1 Homicidal 1 1 2 Open Verdicts Drowning 2 1 3 Execution 1 — 1 50 25 75 Uncertified Deaths. Four deaths were not certified by a registered medical practitioner, and were referred to the Coroner, but no inquest was held. Two were cases of premature birth, another was stated to have died from whooping cough, and the fourth from trismus neonatorum, or lockjaw of the newly born. General. Remarks. The death-rate for the year corrected for internal and external institutions was 16.94 per 1,000, an increase of l.18 per 1,000 compared with 1895. Owing to the prevalence of measles and whooping cough, and to the increase in the number of cases of scarlet fever and diphtheria, it is remarkable that the death-rate was not much higher. To make this death-rate absolutely comparable to the other death-rate in London and the provinces, it must be multiplied by the factor for 128 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. rection for age and sex distribution, which is 1,068, giving a further corrected death-rate of 18.09 per 1,000, the death-rate for the whole Metropolis for the year, also corrected for age and sex distribution, being 19.4 per 1,000. During the year it is also to be noted that the infantile mortality was not so excessive as would have been anticipated owing to the prevalence of measles and whooping cough, but that the heaviest mortality from these occurred between 1 and 5 years. The number of deaths at this age period was, in 1896, 171, while in 1895 the number of deaths was only 84. It is thus evident that the causes of the increased death-rate during the year were causes over which the sanitary department have little or no control, and that until some means are devised for the prevention of measles and whooping cough, it is to be expected that every two or three years there will be an increased mortality from these diseases, and a consequent increase of the general death-rate. The absence of small pox from the sub-district is also to be noted, but in view of the increasing number of nonvaccinated children in ihe sub-district, this immunity cannot be expected to continue indefinitely. Sanitation. A. summary of the sanitary operations during the year is given in Table XIII. of the general report. 3,948 houses and premises were inspected during the year, compared with 2,871 in 1895, an increase of 1,077. The total number of houses inspected in houseto-house inspection, and entered in the register kept for that purpose, was 1,985, compared with 2,079 in 1895, and 2,090 in 1894. There are still some localities in the parish that have not been inspected during these three 129 Pariah of Wandsworth. years, but during the present year these will be overtaken. There is no doubt that this, our first line of defence, is the most important work of the sanitary inspectors, as it is truly preventive in its aim. The number of notices, preliminary and statutory, served during the year shows an increase compared with last year, and it is satisfactory to note that many nuisances have been abated without requiring service of a statutory notice. The number of houses and rooms disinfected after infectious disease was respectively 376 and 424, an increase of 182 and 196. Fumigation is carried out after every case of notified infectious disease, with the exception of typhoid fever, in which case only the bedding is disinfected by steam, and erysipelas, when nothing is done, unless the medical attendant, for particular reasons, advises disinfection. The number of houses in which infectious disease occurred after disinfection was eleven compared with three in 1895. Taking into consideration the number of cases notified, this result is satisfactory, and shows that disinfection is efficiently carried out. 391 sets of bedding were disinfected by the contractor, and I have again to report that this was carried out with despatch and to my entire satisfaction. This also includes articles of wearing apparel, carpets, curtains, &c., removed from rooms in which infectious diseases had occurred. Only 17 cases of overcrowding came under the notice of the sanitary staff during the year, and these were all remedied without the necessity of prosecution. The number of drains relaid was 203, compared with K 130 Medical Officers of Health Avnual Report. 219 last year, and the number of new ventilating pipes erected was only 105 compared with £49. There is also a slight diminution in the number of drains cleansed and repaired, viz.:—325, as against 330 in 1895. The number of waterclosets cleansed and repaired shows a large increase, 447 compared with 398. The reasons for this are principally three, 1st, that the size of flushing cisterns erected in cottage property is too small, the regulations of the water company only permitting a 2-gallon flush, while in the majority of cases this amount does not exceed 11/2 gallons; 2nd, that the appliances are not substantial enough in character, and readily deteriorate: and 3rd, then the tenants themselves are often careless in the use of the flush cistern, and some are wilfully careless in throwing material into the closets for which they were never intended. A supply of water was laid on to 336 closets, a diminution of 100, but the number is still too high. Accumulations of manure are still a source of trouble to the sanitary department. It seems to be increasingly difficult for owners of horses to get rid of the manure, especially at certain seasons. 23 cases more were dealt with compared with last year, the total for 1896 being 66. Two cesspools were abolished, but there still remain a few in some parts of the parish. The other particulars call for no comment, but a study of the whole table will show that the sanitary department has during the year performed a large amount of necessary work, and it is important to observe that out of all the nuisances dealt with by the staff during the year, in only 11 was it necessary to take proceedings at the 131 Parish of Wandsworth. Police Court. The following are particulars of these cases with the result: — (1).—Defective drain; order made, 26s. costs. (2).— „ „ works completed, costs paid. (3).—No dust-bin; dust-bin supplied. (4).—Defective drain; costs paid. (5).— „ „ order made, £2 fine and 8s. costs. (6).— „ „ costs paid, 6s. (7).—Contravention of Bye-Laws; costs on two summonses. (8).—Accumulation of manure; 1s. and 2s. costs. (9).— „ „ £12 and 2s. costs. (10).— „ refuse; £2 and 2s. costs. (11).—Exposure of infected person ; £1 3s. costs. Only one well was closed by order of the Board during the year. Cow Houses. These still show a tendency to decrease being only 9 this year, compared with 11 in 1895, and 14 in 1694. They were all inspected as usual, and found to be in a satisfactory condition. Slaughter Houses. There are nine of these in the sub-district and one knackers' yard. During the year several slight defects have been observed in some of these and notices have been served, which have been promptly attended to by the owners. Bake-houses. These, 40 in number, have been inspected twice during the year, and in five notices were served for lime-washing and cleansing. They are all kept in a satisfactory condition. In one or two the ventilation has been improved. Unsound Food. During the year, 11 cases of haddock, 1 box kippers, 2 barrels crabs, and 3 boxes mackerel have been destroyed, being untit for food. 132 Medical Officers of Health Annual Report. Factory and Workshops' Act. The Factory Act, 1895, bringing laundries under the above Act threw much additional work on the Sanitary Inspectors, but during the first three months of the year all the laundries, with one or two exceptions were inspected and put in a satisfactory condition. There are 16 factories and 72 workshops now on the registor, of which 9 are steam laundries and 52 laundries coming under the Act. In 25 of these laundries notices were served for the following sanitary defects:—In 16 the watercloset accommodation was deficient, 3 defective drains, 5 defective traps, 3 dangerous floors, 7 defective water supply to waterclosets. In two the washhouses were dirty, and in one there was overcrowding. Six notices were received from the Factory Inspector of sanitary defects, and these were promptly attended to and the necessary notices served. ft I have again to report that the Sanitary Inspectors . have carried out all their duties to my entire satisfaction. P. CALDWELL SiMITH, M.A., M.D., D.P.H , CAMB., Medical Officer of Health for Wandsworth. ANNUAL STATEMENT Of the work done under the Sale of Food and Drugs Act, condensed from his statutory quarterly reports, by THE PUBLIC ANALYST. During the year 1896 the Inspector brought to the South London Central Public Laboratory 554 samples of food and drugs, classified as follows:— Dairy products 295 Groceries 211 Bread and Flour 24 Drugs 11 Meat 8 Spirits 5 554 The following tables indicate the nature and amounts of the various articles examined and the results of their analysis. I.—Dairy Produce. The articles entered under this head included: — Milk 151 samples. Butter 119 „ Lard 13 „ Cheese 12 „ Total 295 samples. 134 Report—Public Analyst. And of these the following 17 were found to be more or less deficient in quality:— Articles submitted. Nature and extant of Impurity. Butter 80 per cent, of Margarine. Butter 75 „ „ Butter 75 „ „ Butter 70 „ „ Butter 05 ,, ,, Butter 55 „ „ Butter 40 „ „ Milk 12 per cent, of added water. Milk 8 „ „ Milk 6 „ ,, Milk 6 „ „ Milk 2 „„ Milk 75 per cent, of cream deficient. Milk 37 „ „ Milk 10 „ „ Milk 10 „„ The above Table shows 5.96 per cent, of the milk samples to have departed from the strict standard of purity, as compared with 14.11 in the year 1895. The extent of such departure is also less, the average being a traction over 18 as compared with 24 in 1895. On the other hand the sale of margarine as butter has slightly increased, being 6'72 per cent, as against 4.65 in 1895. During the year a difference of opinion as to the existence of actual adulteration in one of the smaller cases of milk occurred between the official chemists at Somerset House and myself. Such disagreements are unfortunately occasionally inevitable, because these gentlemen are put by law in the difficult position of being given a sample of decomposed milk and being expacted to calculate accurately its composition when fresh as 135 Report—Public Analyst. against the figures of the analyst who actually worked on an undecomposed article. Happily, however, such disagreements have hitherto been almost an unknown quantity in our district. II.—Groceries. These included:— Coffee 86 samples Pepper 32 „ Mustard 32 „ Sugar 11 „ Cocoa 11 „ Arrowroot 10 „ Jam 8 „ Sweets 8 „ Preserved Peas 3 ,, Vinegar 3 „ Olive Oil 3 ,, Pickles 2 „ Ginger 2 „ Total 211 All were found to be perfectly pure, except the preserved peas, which showed a minute trace of copper; but, looking to its amount and to the fact that it was not present as a soluble salt, 1 was unable to certify that these articles were dangerous to health. III.—Bread and Flour. « The entire 24 samples examined were genuine and of good quality. IY.—Drugs. The 11 samples examined included laudanum, Epsom, salt, magnesia, spirit of nitre, sal-volatile, cream of tartar and mixtures as prescribed. All were genuine and the mixtures were carefully dispensed. 136 Report—Public Analyst. V.—Meat. The 8 samples examined consisted of beef sausages, which were found to be "legally genuine." On this point it is interesting to recall the fact that many years ago, soon after the passing of the Act, the sausage question was fought out in a case, where I attempted to stop the addition of bread, as I held and still maintain, that a beef sausage should only consist of chopped beef and seasoning, but, after hearing a mass of trade evidence to the effect that a London beef sausage was always composed of beef, bread, and seasoning and could not be satisfactorily produced commercially otherwise, the case was dismissed. The law thus made still stands uncontradicted and the result is that as much bread as the vendor chooses may be stuck in and the article sold as a "beef sausage." It appears to me that the name should be "beef and bread sausage" and that the term "beef sausage" should be reserved for an all beef article at a proportionately higher price. VI.—Spirits. All five samples of spirits were found up to legal strength. In conclusion, I can only once more emphasise the fact that the gratifying results I have the satisfaction to report are entirely due to the system of continuous daily ipspection originated and since consistently carried out by the Board with unfaltering regularity. JOHN MUTER, PH.D ; F.r.S.E., F.I.C. Public Analyst. %