4388 WANDSWORTH WAN 42 Thirty-sixth Annual Report OF THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT, Being for the Year ended 25th of March, 1892; TO WHICH IS APPENDED The Annual Report of the MEDICAL OFFICERS of HEALTH For the Year, 1891. London: ASHFIELD & YOUNG, STEAM PRINTERS, BRIDGE ROAD WEST, BATTERSEA. 1892. Thirty-six Annual Report OF THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT, Being for the Year ended 25th of March, 1892; TO WHICH IS APPENDED The Annual Report of the MEDICAL OFFICERS of HEALTH For the Year, 1891. London: ASHFIELD & YOUNG, STEAM PRINTERS, BRIDGE ROAD WEST, BATTERSEA, 1892. INDEX. PAGE. Adulteration of Food, &c., Acts 60 Apportionment, Orders of 30 Attendance of Members, Return of 7 Balham Road, paving of with wood and widening 46 Building Acts Amendment 22 Buildings, Notices for New 58 Causeway, Wandsworth, stopping up railway arch 26 Census Returns 62 Committees, List of 5 Contracts, Statement of 64 Dusting and Scavenging 54 Electric Lighting 13 Establishment Expenditure 66 Footpaths, Wandsworth Common, stopping up 26 Government of London 13 Highways, Materials used in repairing 40 Jew's Row, Wandsworth, diversion of footpath 26 Lighting 58 London Brighton & South Coast Railway Bill 22 Loans Appendix. Materials used in repairing highways 40 Medical Officers of Health, Annual Report of 71 Members of the Board, List of 4 ,, ,, Increase of number of 28 New Roads, Flans of 31 Nuisances .38 Officers, List of 8 Parliament, Bills in 23 Paving Works and Improvements, &c.—Clapham 42 „ „ „ Putney 44 „ ,, „ Streatham 46 „ „ „ Tooting 51 ,, „ ,, Wandsworth 52 Private Drains 37 Public Libraries Acts Amendment Act 24 Public Health (London) Act, 1891 14 Rateable value of Parishes in District 62 Receipts and Payments Account 68 ,, „ ,, in detail Appendix. Re-naming streets and re-numbering houses 32 Roads, length of, repaired by the Board 41 School Board for London, Payments to 63 Sewers, Ventilating Shafts, and Gullies, Construction of 33-36 Snow, removal of 56 Steam Road Rollers 42, 46, 48, 52 Subsoil, Removal of, from site of new street 25 Sums owing to and by the Board 67 Tooting Bec Common, Purchase of Land to add to 27 Tramways, Brixton Hill and Streatham Hill 23, 47, 48 „ London County Council Bill 24 Watering Roads, Cost, &c., of 56 "Water Supply of London 9 THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT. LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD, Shewing the Year in which they go out of office. PARISHES. NAMES. ADDRESSES. CLAPHAM 1893 Aldridge, George 44, Grafton Square. 1893 Bowker, David Stanley House, Clapham Park Road. 1895 Brooks, Robert Heygate 182, Elms Road. 1894 Bulcraig, Henry 20, Lydon Road. 1895 Bull, John New Lodge, Loats Road. 1894 Dunkley, William 101, High Street. 1894 Lewin, George 26, Orlando Road. 1893 Lidiard, John Henley Lodge, Clapham Common. 1895 Marfleet, Arthur William 192, Elms Road. 1893 Oxley, Alfred Clapham Cross. 1894 Phillips, Joseph 648, Wandsworth Road. 1895 Quelch, Robert James 66, Bromfelde Road 1895 Sutcliffe, Joseph 641, Wandsworth Road. 1893 Tapson, Joseph Alfred Holmwood, The Grove, Claphm Com. 1894 Unwin, John Williams 12, Sibella Road. PUTNEY 1893 Aviss, Robert Cedar Lodge. 1895 Betts, Thomas 226, Upper Richmond Road 1895 Bonthron, John Pitlochry, Putney Hill. 1893 Gordon, Edwin SelkirkVilla, 250, Upper Richmd Rd. 1893 Harvey, John Park Road, Roehampton 1894 Hewett, William Fairhaven, Dryburgh Road. [Road 1894 Jones, William Henry 4, Carmalt Terrace, Upper Richmond 1894 Maples, Jarvis 175, Upper Richmond Road. 1895 Thorn, Alexander Chartfield, Putney Hill STREATHAM 1895 Arding, Charles Bennett 11, Palace Road, Streatham Hill 1894 Ash down, Thomas Jabez Noel House, Str't'm Pl.,Brixton Hill 1895 Bailey, Samuel F. 47, Streatham Place, Brixton Hill 1895 Bodham, General H. 155, Croxted Road, West Dulwich 1893 Corbet, Thomas Lorimer 7, Palace Road, Streatham Hill 1894 Curtis, Rev. Hubert The Vicarage, Malwood Rd.,Balham 1893 Dickinson, William 135, Bedford Hill, Balham 1895 Gurney, Arthur Russell House, Balham. 1893 Hare, Benjamin Bedford Hill, Balham 1893 Hide, Albert 67, Balham High Road [Streatham 1895 Hill, William James Rylstone, Ambleside Avenue, 1894 Ker, Hugh Tintern, 2, Balham Hill 1894 Laceby, Coulson The Railway Tavern, Greyhound Lane, Streatham 1893 Lyon, Washington, Junr. Ivyholt, Mnt. Ephraim Rd., Streathm. 1893 Martin, Henry J. Paragon Parade, Brixton Hill 1894 Stedman,Chas. Mason, F.S.I The Turret House, Killieser Avenue, Streatham Hill [ham Park. 1895 Weir. Benjamin The Hawthorns, Grove Road, Clap. 1894 Wellborne, Charles E. West holme, Streatham Common 5 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD.— Continued. PARISHES. NAMES. ADDRESSES. TOOTING 1893 Mellhuish, William P. High Street. 1894 Perry, John High Street. 1895 Stowell, Charles Edward Hereford Lodge, Mitcham Road. WANDSWORTH. 1894 Chave, Lewis 2, Upper Richmond Road 1893 Colman, Rev. F. S. St John's Vicarage, Kingston Vale, Putney. 1894 Dickinson, W. H., L.C.C. Woodlea, Bedford Hill, Balham 1895 Ennis, George 12, Dorlcote Road 1895 Evershed, Edwin 7, Red Lion Street 1893 Freeman, H. S. The Elms, St. Ann's Hill. 1894 Gilks. John G. Cluny Lodge,Wimbledon Park Road. 1895 Howell, T. A. I. Cleeve House, West Hill. 1894 Howick, George 95, High Street. 1895 Lamprey, R. Orford 62, East Hill 1893 Pincham, Thomas 77, High Street. 1894 Read, William J. East Hill Lodge, Wandsworth Com. 1893 Roe, A. Dumville 47, West Hill 1833 Selwood, William Raine 52, 54, and 50, High Street. 1895 Sloper, Sidney Fitzroy Eaglehurst, West Hill 1893 Smith, George Thomas Coniscliffe, Trinity Rd. Upper Tooting 1895 Stroulger, Isaac 273, Trinity Road 1894 Willcox, J. W., Junr. 1, The Terrace, Upper Richmond Rd. 6 LIST OF COMMITTEES. FINANCE COMMITTEE. Messrs. Dickinson, L.C.C. Messrs. Maples, Messrs. Stowell. Aldridge, Dickinson, Chave, Bull, Gurney, Ennis, Dunkley, Hare, Evershed. Marfleet, Laceby, Gilks. Phillips, Martin, Pincham. Bonthron, Weir, Read. Hewett, Mellhuish, GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE. Messrs. Dickinson, L.C.C. Messrs. Maples, Messrs. Stowell, Bowker, Curtis, Howell, Bulcraig, Gurney, Howick, Dunkley, Hare, Gilks, Lidiard, Stedman, Read, Oxley, Weir, Smith. Gordon, Wellborne, Stroulger. Hewett, Mellhuish. SANITARY COMMITTEE. Messrs. Dickinson, L.C.C. Messrs. Jones, Messrs. Perry, Brooks, Hare, Colman, Lewin, Hill, Freeman, Quelch, Ker, Howell, Sutcliffe, Lyon, Junr., Lamprey, Tapson, Stedman, Sloper, Betts, Weir, • Smith, Harvey, Mellhuish, RETURN showing the Number of Attendances of Members at Board and Committee Meetings for the Year ended 25th March, 1892. No of Board Meetings held 25 No. of Clapham Local Committee Meetings held 25 ,, Special Board Meetings held 4 ,, Finance Committee Meetings held 16 ,, Putney Local Committee Meetings held 25 ,, General Purposes Committee Meetings held 19 ,, Streatham ,, ,, „ 28 „ „ ,, Sub-Committee Meetings held 1 „ „ ,, Sub-Committee Meetings held 3 „ Sanitary Committee Meetings held 14 ,, Tooting Local Committee Meetings held 13 ,, „ Sub-Committee Meetings held 5 „ Wandsworth „ „ „ 29 „ „ „ Sub-Committee Meetings held 6 ,, Balham Road Widening Committee Meetings held 13 NAMES OF MEMBERS. No. of Board Meetings attended. No. of Special Board Meetings attended. No. of Finance Committee Meetings attended. No. of General Purposes Committee Meetings attended. No. of General Purposes Committee Sub-Committee Meetings attended. No. of Sanitary Committee Meetings attended. No. of Sanitary Committee Sub-Committee Meetings attended. No. of Balham Road Widening Committee Meetings attended. No. of Local Committee Meetings attended. No. of Streatham Local Committee Sub-Committee Meetings attended. No. of Wandsworth Local Committee Sub-Committee Meetings attended. Total Number of Meetings attended. REMARKS. Aldous Edward 3 0 ... ... ... 0 ... ... 1 ... ... 4 Went out of office, June, 1891. Aldridge, George 12 2 0 ... ... ... ... ... 17 ... ... 31 Elected on Finance Committee [October, 1891. Ashdown, Thomas Jabez 24 4 ... 41 ... ... ... 13 24 ... ... 106 Aviss Robert 8 1 ... ... ... 0 ... ... 18 ... ... 27 Beaven, Edwin 1 0 2 ... ... ... ... ... 0 ... ... 3 Went out of office, June, 1891. Bonthron, John 14 4 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 19 ... ... 38 Bowker, David 17 3 ... 31 1 ... ... ... 19 ... ... 71 Brooks, Robert Heygate 20 3 ... ... ... 13 2 ... 19 ... ... 57 Bulcraig, Henry 8 2 0 ... ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... 31 Resigned Membership of Finance Committee, Oct., 1891. Bull, John 3 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... 10 Colman, Rev. F. S. 2 0 ... ... ... 3 1 ... 0 ... 0 6 Cornell, Wllliam 15 2 ... 25 ... 2 ... 10 15 l ... 70 Resigned Membership of General Purposes, Sanitary, and Balham Road Widening Committees, Feb., 1892. Dickinson, W.H., L.C.C. 1 0 0 0 ... 0 ... ... 2 ... 0 3 Dunkley, William 22 3 8 27 ... ... ... ... 17 ... ... 77 Elton, F. E. 1 0 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 4 Resigned Membership of General Purposes Committee March, 1892. Fountain, William 19 4 11 ... ... ... ... ... 23 ... ... 57 Elected June, 1891. Freeman, Harry S. 12 2 ... ... ... 4 ... ... 21 ... 5 44 Gilks, Tohn G. 17 1 9 26 ... ... ... ... 11 ... 0 64 Gordon, Edwin 24 3 ... 44 ... 1 ... ... 24 ... ... 96 Gurney, Arthur 23 4 11 41 ... ... ... 0 20 ... ... 99 Elected on Balham Road Widening Com., Feb., 1892. Hare, Benjamin 20 2 12 6 ... 2 2 ... 22 2 ... 68 Elected on General Purposes and SanitaryCom.,Feb.,1892. Harper, Walter 13 1 10 ... ... ... ... ... 16 ... ... 40 Hewett, William 21 3 13 37 1 ... ... ... 22 ... ... 97 Went out of office June, 1891. Elected on General Purposes Committee March, 1892. Hill, William James 2 0 2 ... ... 1 ... ... 4 ... ... 9 Howell, T. Arthur Ives 19 3 ... 2 ... 9 5 ... 23 ... 5 66 Howick, George 13 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 18 ... 0 33 Lewin, George 10 2 ... ... ... 5 ... ... 10 ... ... 27 Lidiard,John 19 4 ... 21 ... ... ... ... 19 ... ... 63 Lyon,Washington, Junr. 16 4 ... ... ... 6 ... ... 17 ... ... 43 Maples, Jarvis 17 3 12 32 ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... 85 Mellhuish, William P. 9 0 2 12 ... 0 ... 8 13 ... ... 44 Morton, Alpheus C.,M.P. 2 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... 8 Oxley, Alfred 19 4 ... 36 ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... 79 Elected June, 1891, Elected on Sanitary Committee Oct.,1891. Perry, John 10 2 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 12 ... ... 25 Phillips, Joseph 9 2 5 ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... ... 29 Elected June, 1891. Pincham, Thomas 25 4 3 ... ... ... ... ... 27 ... 1 60 Pocock, William, M.D. 8 1 ... ... ... 4 ... ... 11 ... ... 24 Pocock, William willmer 5 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 9 Read, William J. 23 4 12 36 1 ... ... ... 26 ... 2 104 Smith, George Thomas 21 3 ... ... ... 6 ... ... 10 ... 6 40 Stowell, Charles Edward 16 2 5 21 ... ... ... 7 13 ... ... 64 Sutcliffe, Joseph 19 2 ... ... ... 8 2 ... 16 ... ... 47 Tapson, Joseph Alfred 9 1 ... ... ... 7 3 ... 6 ... ... 26 Thorn, Alexander 5 1 2 ... ... ... ... ... 20 ... ... 28 Unwin, John Williams 9 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 15 ... ... 27 Walsh, Nugent Charles 4 0 ... 5 ... ... ... ... 14 ... ... 23 Weir, Benjamin 18 4 10 32 1 6 2 11 23 2 ... 109 Wellborne, Charles E. 13 4 ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 ... ... 38 Note.—A dotted line (...) in a column signifies that the Member of the Board opposite whose name it is placed is not a Member of the Committee named at the head of such column. LIST OF THE OFFICERS OF THE BOARD. Names. Offices. Addresses. Salaries. Hills, Henry George Clerk Offices of the Board, East Hill, Wandsworth £600 per annum Richards, Charles F. First Office Clerk Ditto. £170 „ Ellis, Edward J. Second Ditto Ditto. £115 „ Haddock, William C. Third Ditto Ditto. 37/- per week Rowe, Herbert Fourth Ditto Ditto. 30/- ,, Waters, Charles J. Fifth Ditto Ditto. 20/- „ Thorne, Arthur W. Sixth Do. Ditto. 15/- ,, Durrant, Charles C. Collecting Clerk Ditto. £160 per annum Southam, Arthur Surveyor for Clapham 60, Old Town, Clapham £450 „ Radford, John Charles Ditto, Putney 113, High Street, Putney £450 ,, Barber, James Ditto, Streatham Encombe, Endlesham Road, Balham £450 „ Wood, Henry C. Ditto, Tooting Parish Depot, Defoe Road, Tooting £50 „ (Vacant) Ditto, Wandsworth Parish Wharf, Bell Lane, Wandsworth Field, Oliver, M.D. Medical Officer of Health, Clapham Gardner House, Clapham Common, North Side £160 „ Orr, William Young, M.B. Ditto, Putney High Street, Putney £160 „ Sutton, Field Flowers, M.D. Ditto, Streatham Balham Hill £160 „ Brock C. de Lisle Ditto, Tooting Alstone Lawn, Tooting £20 „ Nicholas, George E., M.D. Ditto, Wandsworth Church Row, Wandsworth £160 „ Young, Walter William Solicitor Hertford House, Albert Rd. Battersea Park, and 24, Ely Place, E.C. £100 per ann. and costs in actions in superior courts. Muter, Dr. John, F.C.S. Analyst under the Sale of Food, &c., Acts 325, Kennington Road 10s. for each analysis made, not to exceed 400 analyses per annum. Smith, Samuel H. Inspector, ditto Offices of the Board, East Hill, Wandsworth £2 9s. per week Coote, Thomas C. Messenger and Office Keeper Ditto. 30/- per week, apartments, coals, and gas. Donnelly, Charles H. Office Boy Ditto. 13/6 per week. ASSISTANTS IN THE SURVEYORS' OFFICES. Parishes Names. Offices. Salaries. Clapham Young, E. G. Surveyor's Assistant £2 16s. per week Weaver, E. R. „ „ £1 10s. ,, Fairchild, S. G. Sanitary Inspector £3 3s. „ Nurcombe, B. Assistant ditto £2 10s. „ Crabbe,W. G. Ditto ditto £2 2s. „ Fisher,Thomas Dusting Inspector £1 14s. „ Haddock, H. F. Clerk £1 10s. „ Putney Chasemore, A. Surveyor's Assistant £2 10s. ,, Hills, H. J. „ „ £1 10s. „ Blackmore, H. „ „ £1 „ Russell, G. Sanitary Inspector £2 15s. „ Streatham Bartholomew, Walter Surveyor's Assistant £3 „ Roe. James Clerk £2 10s „ Phimister, Geo. Sanitary Inspector £2 15s. ,, Kershaw, Edward Ditto ditto £2 5s. ,, Jones, James Assistant ditto £l 12/6 „ Ratcliffe, John Dusting Inspector £1 10s. „ Tooting Friedlander, Morris H. Sanitary Inspector £1 10s. „ Howard, J. M. Surveyor's Assistant £2 10s. „ Wandsworth Trusler, D. „ „ £2 „ Gadsby, S. J. Clerk £1 17s. 6d. „ Crane, S. Sanitary Inspector £2 10s. ,, Hollis. J. Assistant ditto £2 5s. „ Russell, James Ditto ditto £2 „ Earwaker, G. Dusting Inspector £1 10s. „ THIRTY-SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT of THE BOARD OF WORKS for the WANDSWORTH DISTRICT, Being for the Year ended 25th March, 1892. Water Supply. The Select Committee of the House of Commons who, as stated in the last Annual Report, had under consideration the London Water Commission Bill (promoted by the City Corporation) and the Metropolis Water Supply Bill (promoted by a Committee representing Vestries and District Boards) made the following report upon the subject, viz.:— 1.—"Your Committee have proceeded upon the assumption that in the opinion of Parliament it is desirable to establish a single public representative water authority for the metropolis. 2.—"The Royal Commission presided over by the Duke of Richmond reported in 1869, 'That the future control of the water supply should be entrusted to a responsible public body, with powers conferred on them for purchase and extension of existing works, and for levying certain rates referred to.' And the Select Committee, of which Sir W. V. Harcourt was Chairman, and which examined into the provisional agreements for purchase contained in the Government Bill of 1880, reported, 'That it is expedient that the supply of water to the metropolis should be placed under the control of seme public body, which shall represent the interests and command the confidence of the water consumers.' 3.—"Since these Reports much valuable experience has been gained of the growth of population, and of the undertakings of the water companies and the demands upon them. Parliament also, since 1886 has adopted the policy of enforcing more stringent provisions in the case of the issue of any fresh capital. An important enquiry into the whole matter, too, has recently been held by the Corporation of the City of London; and it is evident that there is much fresh light for the consideration of the question from every point of view. Your Committee, therefore, consider it to be most desirable that the problem should be carefully and deliberately examined by the newly-contructed municipal authc rity, the London County Council, in the interests of the water consumers of the metropolis. 10 4.—"The London County Council were in the Session of 1890, entrusted with powers to initiate negotiations with the water companies, and to incur certain limited expenditure in preliminary inquiries, but those inquiries are necessarily as yet incomplete. 6.—"Your Committee recommend— "(i.) That powers should be granted to the London County Council to expend such further sums as may be reasonably necessary; in order that they may examine thoroughly for themselves, as the responsible municipal authority of London, the whole position of the metropolitan water supply, and come to a conclusion as to the policy which, for financial and other reasons, it is desirable to adopt. "(ii.) That, if they should so resolve, they should have power to promote a Bill or Bills in Parliament for the purpose of constituting themselves the responsible water authority for London, acting through a statutory committee, appointed either wholly by themselves, or partly in conjunction with the Corporation of the City of London, as suggested to your Committee on behalf of both bodies. Such statutory committee to comprise a certain number of members possessing special knowledge and qualifications, not necessarily members of the body or bodies appointing. "(iii.) That the London County Council, if constituted the water authority, should be required to purchase, either alone or in conjunction with such of the authorities of the outside areas as may be arranged, the undertakings of the eight water companies (except possibly certain lands of the New River Company) by agreement or, failing agreement, by arbitration, within a fixed period. "(iv.) That, subject to any such arrangements, the new water authority should take over the duties and obligations which the present water companies now have towards the consumers of water in the districts outside the boundaries of the County of London, but within the limits of supply of the present companies. "(v.) That in the event of purchase by the new authority power should be given to that authority, and to the authorities of the outside areas, to negotiate for the purchase by the latter (a) of so much of the works of distribution as is appropriated to the district of such local authority, and of the right to a supply of water in bulk from the new authority; or (b) possibly of some of the sources of supply which, with their works of distribution, it might be found practicable and advantageous to sever from the general scheme. "(vi.) That those local authorities, which, like Croydon, Richmond, and Tottenham, are situated within the metropolitan water area, but have their own independent water supply, should, in the event of the purchase of the water companies by the new water authority, be guaranteed in the exercise of their present rights. 6.—"In the event of the undertakings of the companies not being acquired by purchase, the Committee recommend that there should be a Parliamentary inquiry, before which the interests of the whole of the consumers within the area of the present metropolitan water supply ought to be represented, into the statutory powers and obligations of the water companies, and the control which is now exercised by public departments and the metropolitan and other authorities over them. In the Appendix to the Minutes of Evidence will be found a memorandum setting out the existing conditions, but it might possibly be found advantageous to make the obligations and the control more complete. 11 7.—"Your Committee found it impossible, within the limits of the time at their disposal, to conduct satisfactorily any examination into the quality and quantity of the London water supply. But, apart from that consideration, they are of opinion that these questions will naturally form a part of the complete inquiry which it will be the duty of the London County Council to conduct, with the assistance of the professional advice which, as your Committee have recommended, should be at their disposal. 8.—"Although your Committee have not been able, for the same reason, to examine into any of the cases sought to be established before them by the various local authorities of the areas in which are contained the present scources of supply, for the protection of their separate interests, your Committee have received sufficient indication that there exist complaints, founded or unfounded, that those sources are in some quarters being even already overtaxed. Your Committee do not see their way to recommending any practicable method for the effective association of any of these authorities with the inquiry, for which the London County Council must be responsible. But they are of opinon that in any such inquiry regard must be had. on the one hand, to the statutory rights of the present water companies, and, on the other, to the legitimate wants and necessities of the inhabitants of those areas. It must remain with Parliament ultimately to decide upon the merits of any scheme submitted. 9.—''In view of the possibilty of its being ultimately established that the present sources of supply cannot be extended, and that additional sources are required, and in view also of the fact that the possible fresh areas of supply are limited, and are already being drained for other large communities, your Committee think that Parliament may well consider before granting any powers for further encroachment upon those areas, how far provision ought fairly to be made for the possible requirements alike of the metropolis and other large populations upon the lines of supply. 10.—"Of the two Bills before your Committee for the constitution of a new water authority, neither appeared to them calculated to effect a satisfactory solution of the problem, but your Committee desire to place upon record their opinion that both those Bills were promoted in the public interest, and to considerable public advantage." "14th July 1891." An application was made to the Parliamentary Committee for payment of the expenses incurred by the Vestries and District Boards in the promotion of their Bill, but the Committee were of opinion that they had no power to deal with the question of costs. This Board have contributed £200 and have promised conditionally to contribute a further sum of £100 towards the expenses. In the present Session of Parliament two Bills in identical terms have been introduced into the House of Commons by the City Corporation and the London 12 County Council respectively, providing for the appoinment of a Water Committee, one-eighth of the Members of such Committee to be appointed by the Corporation and seven-eighths by the London County Council. Under the provisions of these Bills the County Council would have power to promote Bills in Parliament for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, and maintaining water works, to afford a new or a supplemental supply, to acquire or lease any water works, and for other purposes in connection therewith. The Water Committee would be empowered to make enquiries as to the existing supply of water within the Metropolitan water area, the charges made for the same, and as to the possible sources of supply, and to enter into negotiations with Companies, &c., for the acquisition or taking on lease of their undertakings ; and the Committee were to have delegated to them all the administrative and executive functions of carrying on the supply of water. Only the Bill of the London County Council is being proceeded with, and the Committee of the House of Commons who have it under consideration have expressed an opinion adverse to the creation of the proposed Water Committee, but they are proceeding with the consideration of the other provisions of the Bill. On the 15th March last, a Royal Commission was appointed to enquire:— "Whether, taking into consideration the growth of the population of the Metropolis and the districts within the limits of the metropolitan water companies, and also the needs of the localities not supplied by any Metropolitan Company but within the watersheds of the Thames and the Lea, the present sources of supply of these Companies are adequate in quantity or quality, and, if inadequate, whether such supply as may be required can be obtained within the watersheds referred to, having due regard to the claims of the districts outside the Metropolis but within those watersheds, or will have to be obtained outside the watersheds of the Thames and Lea." The Commission consists of Lord Balfour of Burleigh; Sir Gr. B. Bruce, C.E.; Sir A. Geikie, D.Sc., 13 LL.D., F.R.S.; Professor J. Dewar, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.; G. H. Hill, Esq., C.E.; J. Mansergh, Esq., C.E.; and W. Ogle, Esq., M.D. Evidence is now being taken by the Commission on the subject. Government of London. The Districts Councils Bill, to which reference was made in the Board's report for last year, was again referred to in the Queen's Speech at the opening of the present Session, as a measure which it was hoped it would be possible for Parliament to consider. It has, however, not yet been introduced. Electric Lighting. The Wandsworth District Electric Supply Order, 1890, has been revoked by the Board of Trade, the promoters having failed to comply with the requirements referred to in the last annual report. The provisional order obtained last year by the Stamford Hill &c., Company, passed through Parliament. It applies only to the Parish of Putney and the western portion of the Parish of Wandsworth. Nothing has yet been done under its provisions in the District. In the present session the same promoters (now the Putney and Hammersmith Electric Light and Power Supply, Limited) applied for an order for the remaining portion of the Board's District, but after assenting to the requirements of the Board as to the list of streets to be lighted within the specified period of two years, and on other points, the promoters have intimated their intention not to proceed with the application. An order has also been applied for by the County of London Electric Lighting Company for the supply of electricity throughout the whole of the District of the Board. The promoters having amended the draft Order in accordance with the Board's requirements, the Board of Trade have approved of the Order, and it is now before Parliament for confirmation. 14 Public Health (London) Act, 1891. The Public Health (London) Law Consolidation Bill and the Public Health (London) Law Amendment Bill were introduced into the House of Commons in February 1891, and referred to the Grand Committee on Law, with instructions to consolidate them into one Bill. The following report thereon was made to the Board by the General Purposes Committee:— "Your Committee have considered the Public Health (London) Law Consolidation Bill which has been introduced into Parliament by Mr. Ritchie, President of the Local Government Board. Your Committee have to report that nearly all the suggestions made by this Board when the draft Bill was forwarded to them by the Local Government Board for consideration in February of last year have been adopted in the Bill as now printed, or provision made therefor in the Amendment Bill hereinafter reported upon. Your Committee however are of opinion that as the Bill is intended to consolidate all the existing law relating to sanitary matters in the Metropolis, it should include the laws relating to the inspection of bakehouses, which are now administered oy the sanitary authorities. They accordingly recommend that it be suggested to the Local Government Board that such laws should be incorporated in the Bill. "Your Committee have considered the Public Health (London) Law Amendment Bill, which has been also introduced into Parliament by Mr. Ritchie, and a report from the Medical Officers of Health thereon. Your Committee approve of many of the provisions of the Bill, but the following should in their opinion be objected to by the Board, viz.:— (a) "Clause 13 (l), which provides that the removal of house and street refuse by a sanitary authority shall be deemed to be a business within sec. 27 of the Nuisances Removal Act, 1855 (relating to noxious trades), and that the London County Council may take proceedings with regard thereto against the sanitary authority. (b) "Clause 13 (2), which would give the County Council the powers of a sanitary authority for the purpose of dealing with premises used by a local sanitary authority for the disposal of street or house refuse. (c) "Clause 15 continues and extends the liability of occupiers and owners , of premises to cleanse the footpaths and wateroourses adjoining their premises, and clause 16 requires the sanitary authority to secure such cleansing either by doing the work or by enforcing the discharge of the duty by occupiers or owners. Your Committee are of opinion that this work can only be affectually done by the sanitary authority, and they recommend that Clause 15 should be omitted, and that Clause 16 should be amended accordingly. (d) " Clause 16 (3), which imposes a fine of £50 upon a sanitary authority if a street (including the footway) is not properly swept and cleansed and the refuse collected and removed therefrom. (c) "Clause 17 (3), which imposes a fine of £50 upon a sanitary authority if the house refuse is not removed from any premises at the ordinary period, or within 24 hours after notioe from the occupier of the premises; the authority may be ordered to pay in addition 5s. a day to the occupier while the non-compliance continues. 15 (f) "So much of clause 26 (2) as would render necessary the approval of the County Council to an arrangement between different sanitary authorities for the use of the same disinfecting apparatus. (g) "Clause 29 (2), which provides for the payment by the sanitary authority of a 'reasonable sum' to persons who are prohibited by clause 29 (1) from carrying on their ordinary trade or business in consequence of suffering from infectious disease. (h) "Clause 34 (2, 3, 4), which would empower the County Council to dispense with or modify the provisions of that clause relating to the occupation of underground rooms as dwellings. (i) "Clause 35 (2) which provides that a Medical Officer of Health shall reside in his district or within a mile thereof 'except in cases 'allowed by the Local Government Board.' (j) "Clause 35 (4), which would empower the Local Government Board, on a representation from the County Council, to order a sanitary authority to appoint additional sanitary inspectors and to fix their remuneration. (k) "Clause 35 (6), which provides that the nuisances complaint and order book shall be open to the inspection of an officer of the County Council. (l) "Clause 35 (8), which provides that Medical Officers of Health and Sanitary Inspectors shall be removable by the Sanitary Authority 'with the 'consent of the Local Government Board, or by that Board, and not 'otherwise.' (m) "Clause 35 (9), which would empower the sanitary authority 'with the 'sanction of the Local Government Board' to make temporary arrangements for the performance of the duties of Medical Officer of Health and Sanitary Inspector. (n) "Clause 36, which would empower the County Council to institute proceedings with regard to nuisances on it being proved to their satisfaction that the sanitary authority have made default in doing their duty. (o) "Clause 37, which would empower the Local Government Board, upon complaint made by the County Council that a sanitary authority have made default in executing or enforcing any provisions which it is their duty to execute or enforce, to make an order limiting the time for the performance of the duty or to appoint the County Council to perform such duty at the cost of the sanitary authority. "Under the provisions of clauses 9 and 20 the County Council, with the sanction of the Local Government Board, may make bye-laws as to cleansing streets and the prevention of nuisances and with respect to water closets, &c., such bye-laws to be enforced by the sanitary authorities. As it is no doubt desirable that the same bye-laws should be in force over the whole of London, your Committee do not object to these provisions. They however suggest that clause 9 (c), which deals with the removal of offensive matter in or through London, should be extended so as to enable a bye-law to be made providing not only that the carriage or vessel used shall be properly constructed and covered so as to prevent the escape of the matter or liquid, but also so as to prevent any nuisance arising therefrom. "Your Committee recommend that the petition to Parliament against the Bill, prepared by the Clerk and accompanying the report, be approved and adopted, and that copies thereof and of the objections of the Board to the Bill be forwarded to the Local Government Board and to the Members of Parliament for the District," 16 The Board adopted the foregoing report and decided further to suggest the insertion in the Bill of a clause to the effect that no house newly erected in the Metropolis should be occupied before the Sanitary Authority had issued a certificate to the effect that such house was properly drained and fit for human habitation. Manyother Sanitary Authorities also took steps in opposition to the provisions mentioned in the foregoing report and to other clause of the Bill, but Mr. Ritchik stood firmly by most of the provisions as introduced, and he was supported by the majority of the Grand Committee. The following further report on the subject was made to the Board by the General Purposes Committee:— "Your Committee have considered the Public Health (London) Bill, as passed by the House of Commons Standing Committee on Law. The suggestions of the Board that the provisions of the Bill as introduced relating to the cleansing of foot paths should be amended so that the occupiers and owners of premises should not be liable therefor, but that such cleansing should be carried out by the sanitary authority, and for an amendment of the provision relating to the conveyance of offensive matter along streets, have been adopted. The clause of the Bill which empowered the County Council to dispense with or modify the provisions relating to underground dwellings, which was objected to by this Board has been altered so as to give such powers to the Local Government Board. The clause providing for the payment of 'a reasonable sum' to persons prohibited from carrying on their trade or business in consequence of suffering from infectious disease, and the provision which would have required the approval of the Loudon County Council to an arrangement between different sanitary authorities for the use of the same disinfecting apparatus, which were also objected to by this Board, have been struck out of the Bill. The following provisions, however, which were strongly objected to by this Board and by other District Boards and Vestries, have been passed by the Parliamentary Committee in practically the same form in which they were introduced, viz.:— "Clause 22 (1), which provides that the removal of house and street refuse by a sanitary authority shall be deemed to be a business within the meaning of the olause of the Bill relating to offensive trades, and that the London County Council may take proceedings with regard thereto as if the County Council were a sanitary authority. "Clause 22 (2), which would give the County Council the powers of a sanitary authority for the purpose of dealing with premises used by a local sanitary authority for the treatment or disposal of street or house refuse. "Clause 28 (2), which imposes a fine of £50 upon a sanitary authority if a street (including the footway) is not properly swept and cleansed and the refuse collected and removed therefrom. "Clause 29 (1b), which imposes a fine of £50 upon a sanitary authority if the house refuse is not removed from any premises at the ordinary period, or within 48 hours after notice from the occupier of the premises. 17 "Clause 29 (2), under which the authority may be ordered to pay in addition 5s. a day to the occupier while the non-compliance continues. "Clause 98, which would empower the County Council to institute proceedings with regard to nuisances on it being proved to their satisfaction that the sanitary authority have made default in doing their duly, and to recover the expenses thereof from the sanitary authority. "Clause 99, which would empower the Local Government Board, upon complaint made by the County Council that a sanitary authority have made default in executing or enforcing any provisions which it is their duty to execute or enforce, to make an order limiting the time for the performance of the duty and to appoint the County Council to perform such duty at the cost of the sanitary authority. "Clause 104 (3), which provides that a Medical Officer of Health shall reside in his district or within a mile thereof 'except in cases allowed by the Local Government Board.' "Clause 105 (2), which would empower the Local Government Board, on a representation from the County Council, to order a sanitary authority to appoint additional sanitary inspectors and to fix their remuneration. "Clause 105 (3), which provides that the nuisances complaint and order book shall be open to the inspection of an officer of the County Council. "Clause 106 (2b), which provides that Medical Officers of Health and Sanitary Inspectors shall be removable by the Sanitary Authority 'with the consent 'of the Local Government Board, or by that Board, and not otherwise.' "Clause 107, which would empower the sanitary authority 'with the sanction 'of the Local Government Board 'to make temporary arrangements for the performance of the duties of Medical Officer of Health and Sanitary Inspector. "The Bill as passed by the Parliamentary Committee will be reported to the House on Monday next, and your Committee have therefore instructed the Clerk to again communicate with the Members of Parliament for this District and with Mr. Morton, M.P., with the view of the Board's objections to the foregoing provisions being further considered. "The new clause suggested by the Board to the effect; that no house newly erected in the Metropolis shall be occupied before the sanitary authority has issued a certificate that such house is properly drained and fit for human habitation was not adopted by the Parliamentary Committee, and your Committee have instructed the Clerk to bring this clause again under the notice of the above-mentioned Members of Parliament, "The new clause proposed by Mr. Morton, M.P., providing for appeals in all matters to the London County Council, to which the Board objected, was not adopted by the Parliamentary Committee. Your Committee have instructed the Clerk to inform the above-mentioned Members of Parliament that in the event of the provisions which introduce the London County Council as a controlling authority being omitted from the Bill, the Board suggest that in substitution thereof a clause might be inserted providing for an appeal to the Local Government Board by any person who deems himself aggrieved by the neglect or refusal of a sanitary authority to do anything which such authority is required to do by the Bill. "The Board suggested to the Local Government Board the desirability of incorporating in the Bill the law relating to the sanitary regulation of bakehouses. Provisions similar to those of the Factory and Workshop Act, 1883, which made the sanitary authority the authority for carrying out the provisions of the Factor 18 and Workshop Acts so far as they relate to bakehouses have now been inserted in the Bill. Your Committee are of opinion that instead of the Bill merely constituting the sanitary authority the authority to carry out certain provisions in another Act of Parliament, such provisions should be incorporated in the Bill itself, and they have instructed the Clerk to suggest to the Local Government Board that this course should be adopted; also to again call the attention of the President of such Board to this Board's objections to the Bill." Upon the third reading of the Bill on the 26th of June, Mr. Morton, M.P., a member of this Board for the parish of Clapham, proposed the Board's clause with regard to newly erected houses, but Mr. Ritchie stated that whilst he sympathised with the object of the clause he thought it should be postponed until next year, when he proposed to deal with the building laws of the Metropolis. Lord Cross had charge of the Bill in the House of Lords, where it was read a second time on the 7th July. It received the Royal assent on the 5th August, and came into operation on the 1st January, 1892. The Act was referred by the Board to the Sanitary Committee, who made the following report upon it, viz:— 1.—"Your Committee beg to report that, pursuant to the reference to them, they have considered the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, which comes into operation ot> the 1st of January next. 2.—"The following are the principal changes made by the Act in the present law upon which it is necessary for the Board to take action, viz.:— 3.—"The Sanitary Authority are to carry out the law relating to smoke consumption (section 23.) 4.—"The cleanliness, &c., of workshops to be enforced by the Sanitary Authority (section 25). 5.—"Footways of parish roads to be properly swept and cleansed by the Sanitary Authority (section 29). 6.—"Notice to be given by Sanitary Authority of the times appointed for clearing ashpits, earth closets, privies, and cesspools (section 30). 7.—"Factories and workshops to be provided with sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences (section 38). 8.—"Newly erected houses not to be occupied until the Sanitary Authority have certified that they have a proper and sufficient supply of water (section 48). The same section provides that an occupied house without a proper and sufficient supply of water shall be a nusiance liable to be dealt with under the Act, and, if it is a dwelling-house, shall be deemed unfit for human habitation. 19 9.—"Copy certificate of infectious disease to be sent to the head teacher of the school attended by the patient (if a child), or by any child who is an inmate of the same house as the patient (section £5). 10.—"The Sanitary Authority to provide disinfecting apparatus and carriages for the removal of articles to be disinfected, and to disinfect premises, bedding, &c., free of charge (sections 59-61). 11.—"The provisions of the Act as to underground rooms used as dwellings to be enforced by the Sanitary Authority (sections 96 and 97). 12.-"The Act amplifies the powers of the Sanitary Authorities in many respects, and your Committee desire to call special attention to the following provisions, which will enable the Board to take action in cases which it has hitherto been impossible to deal with effectually, viz.:—(a) the definition of nuisance is extended to include premises in such a state as to be 'dangerous' as well as those which are 'injurious' to health (section 2); (b) a magistrate may authorise entry at night into a house alleged to be overcrowded (section 115); (c) premises within 40 yards of any street or place are to be deemed unfit for keeping swine (section 17). 13. —"Tour Committee recommend that the Board instruct the Sanitary Inspectors to serve notices immediately upon nuisances being brought to their knowledge. in accordance with section 3 of the Act, and to specify in notices under section 4, as far as practicable, the works required to be executed for the purpose of abating or preventing the recurrence of the nuisance complained of. Your Committee also recommend that all the officers of the Board be directed to give information to the Sanitary Inspectors, pursuant to section 3 of the Act, of any nuisances which may come to their knowledge 14.—"It may be necessary to increase the sanitary staff in order to carry out the above-mentioned provisions of the Act, and your Committee recommend that it be referred to the several Local Committees to report as soon as possible what additional appointments (if any), should be made in their respective parishes with that object. 15.—"Tour Committee recommend that an Inspector be employed in each parish in the district, as is now the case in some of our parishes, in superintending the collection of house refuse. The Board are liable under the new Act to a penalty of £20 if such refuse is not removed within 48 hours of the request of the occupier of the premises. Your Committee also recommend that cards, in the form settled by them and accompanying this report, be printed and left at every house in the District, giving notice of the day on which the house refuse will be called for. This system is already carried out in some parts of the District. Your Committee have noted on the card that if a dustman demands any fee or gratuity for removing house refuse he is liable to a fine of 20s. 16.—"Your Committee recommend that a register be kept in each parish of all underground rooms used as dwellings, and that such rooms be inspected once in every six months and a report presented to your Committee upon the result of such inspection. 17.—"Your Committee recommend that the Surveyors be instructed to report to their respective Local Committees as to what steps are in their opinion necessary to be taken with the view of complying with the provisions of section 29 with regard to the cleansing of the footways (for which the occupiers or owners ot the adjoining premises have hitherto been responsible), and of section 48 with regard to certificates relating to the water supply of newly-erected houses. 20 18.—"With reference to the provisions of section 55 your Committee are of opinion that as a copy of certificates of infectious disease will in future be sent to the head teachers of schools it will not be necessary for such cases to be notified, as at present, to the Superintendent of School Board Visitors for the Division. 19.—"Your Committee recommend that the Board suggest to the Local Government Board the desirability of the attention of the governing bodies of general hospitals being called to the provisions of section 73 of the Act relating to nonremoval, except for the purpose of burial, of the bodies of persons who have died in hospitals from infectious disease. 20.—"The provisions of sections 59-61 point to the desirability of the Board themselves providing a disinfecting apparatus. Your Committee are, however, of opinion that the present system of having bedding, &c., disinfected by super-heated steam by a contractor may be continued, but it should be fully carried out by all the parishes in the district. 21.—"Bye-laws are to be made by the Sanitary Authority for the following purposes, viz.:— (a) "For the prevention of nuisances arising from snow, ice, rubbish, &c., in streets (section 16). (b) "For preventing nuisances arising from offensive matter running out of manufactories, butchers' shops, &c. (section 16). (c) "For the prevention of the keeping of animals so as to be a nuisance (section 16). (d) "As to paving yards, &c., of houses (section 16). (e) "With respect to the keeping of water closets supplied with sufficient water (section 39). (f ) "For securing the cleanliness of cisterns, &c. (section 50). (g) "For fixing the number of persons who may occupy a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, and for the registration, inspection, cleansing, &c, of such houses (section 94). 22.—"Bye-laws may be made by the Sanitary Authority for the following purposes, viz.:— (h) "For promoting cleanliness, &c., in tents, vans, &c., used for human habitation (section 95). (i) "For removing to Hospital persons brought within the district by vessels, who are infected with dangerous infectious diseases (section 66). j) " With respect to management and charges for the use of mortuaries (section 88). 23.—"Your Committee have under consideration the draft bye-laws as to houses let in lodgings, which were prepared by the Clerk and considered by the Board in January, 18S6, and they will report thereon, and also as to the existing bye-laws of the Board as to tents and vans used for human habitation, in due course. 24.—"With regard to bye-laws under sections 16, 39, 50, 66, and 88, your Committee are in communication with the Local Government Board as to the model bye-laws which such Board propose to issue relating to the matters therein referred to. 21 25.—"Under the provisions of sections 16, 39, and 114, the London CountyCouncil are to make bye-laws, which are to be enforced by the Sanitary Authority, with regard to the following matters, viz.:— (a) "Prescribing the times for the removal of offensive matter through streets, and as to the carriages, &c., used therefor (section 16). (b) As to closing cesspools, &c., removal of refuse, and duties of occupiers of houses as to removal of house refuse (section 16). (c) "Water closets, earth closets, privies, ashpits, cesspools, &c (section 39) "The County Council in making these bye-laws are to consider any representations made by the sanitary authority, and are to send a copy of the proposed bye-laws to such authority not less than two months before applying to the Local Government Board for the confirmation thereof. 26.—"Section 97 of the Act authorises the Sanitary Authority to make general regulations or special orders in particular cases dispensing with or modifying the new requirements of the Act with regard to underground dwellings. Your Committee are of opinion that no such general regulations should at present be made by the Board, but that any applications in the matter that may be made by owners should be considered separately on their merits. 27.—"Your Committee recommend that at the first meeting of the Board after the 1st January next, the several Local Committees be appointed Committees for the purposes of the Act in their respective parishes under the provisions of section 99, and that written authority under section 115 to the Sanitary Inspectors to enter premises for the purposes of the Act be sealed with the seal of the Board. 28.—"Your Committee have settled the necessary forms of notice under the provisions of the Act, which have been prepared by the Clerk, and recommend that the same be printed in readiness for use as soon as the Act comes into operation." This report was adopted by the Board. Model ByeLaws prepared by the Local Government upon the following matters, viz.:— 1.—"For securing the cleanliness and freedom from pollution of tanks, cisterns, and other receptacles used for storing of water used or likely to be used by man for drinking or domestic purposes, or for manufacturing drink for the use of man. 2.—"With respect to the keeping of water closets supplied with sufficient water for their effective action. 3.—"For the prevention of nuisances arising from any snow ice, salt, dust, ashes, rubbish, offal, carrion, fish, or filth, or other matter or thing in any street. 4.— "For preventing nuisances arising from any offensive matter running out of any manufactory, brewery, slaughter-house, knackers' yard, butchers' or fishmongers' shop, or dunghill, into any uncovered place whether or not surrounded by a wall or fence. 5.—For the prevention of the keeping of animals on any premises so as to be a nuisance or injurious or dangerous to health. 6.—"As to the paving of yards and open spaces in connection with dwelling- houses. 22 have been considered and the Board's suggestions thereon submitted to the Local Government Board, with the view of their adoption. The Board have also revised their existing Bye-Laws with respect to tents, vans, sheds, and similar structures used for human habitation, and have submitted them to the Local Government Board for approval. The Board some time since prepared ByeLaws with respect to houses let in lodgings, &c., but they have thought it advisable to defer adopting them until they have had an opportunity of considering the model Bye-Laws relating thereto which the Local Government Board are now preparing. Building Acts Amendment. In September, 1891, the Board considered the draft of a Bill which had been prepared by the Local Government Board for consolidating the enactments relating to the construction and sites of buildings in London. The Board forwarded their suggestions thereon to the Local Government Board, and asked to be furnished with a copy of the draft Bill which it was understood was being prepared for amending the Building Laws. This request has not at present been complied with, nor has the Bill been introduced into Parliament. A Conference of Delegates from Vestries and District Boards, in which this Board took part, has been held at the Kensington Town Hall, and a memorial to the Local Government Board suggesting amendments in the existing building law adopted. London, Brighton and South Coast Railway Bill. Amongst the Parliamentary notices for the present Session was one from the London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway Company, proposing to obtain powers to divert a portion of the footpath adjoining the railway at Conyers Road, Streatham, and to stop up a part of the road. As there is a sewer in the load in question the Board have been in communication with the Railway Company on the subject, 23 and an agreement has been arranged under which the Company will extend the road as well as the footpath to Potter's Lane, and will divert the sewer to the satisfaction of the Board. London Tramways Bill. The London Tramways Company gave notice of their intention to apply for powers to extend their tramway line at Steatham Hill from the termination of the existing tramway near Telford Avenue, to a point near Greyhound Lane. The Board received petitions from a large number of owners and residents of houses in the locality objecting to the scheme, and after fully considering the matter they decided to withhold their consent to the proposed tramways. The scheme was consequently abandoned. Bills in Parliament. In addition to the above-mentioned Bills the following have also been considered by the Board, viz.:— County of London Quarter Sessions. Footpaths and Roadside Wastes. London County Couucil (General Powers). London County Council (Subways). London County Council (Tramways). Margarine Act Amendment. National Telephone Company. New Telephone Company. Plumbers' Registration. Public Libraries Law Consolidation Sale of Food and Drugs Acts Amendment. School Board fcr London (Superannuation). Vestrymen's Qualification. Ward Electrical Car Company. Water Companies (Regulation of Powers). The Footpaths and Roadside Wastes Bill was introduced into Parliament by Mr. Shaw Lffevre. The Board were of opinion that its provisions would assist Highway Authorities in preventing obstructions of the public way. They therefore approved of the Bill, but suggested an amendment of one of its clauses. 24 The Board requested the Members of Parliament for this District to oppose the provisions of the London County Council (General Powers) Bill, which would enable the Council to incur an unlimited expenditure for enquiries and negotiations relating to the supply of water. The London County Council (Tramways) Bill authorised the Council to construct and work a tramway line from the termination of the existing tramways on the south side of Westminster Bridge over the bridge and along the Victoria Embankment. The Board had previously passed a resolution disapproving of the proposed purchase by the Council of a portion of the tramways belonging to the London Street Tramways Company, and of the purchase of any other tramways by the Council, on the ground that the carrying on of the business of a Tramways Company by the Council would not be to the public advantage. The Board decided to oppose the Bill, but they were advised that they had no locus standi in the matter and they could do nothing beyond communicating their views to the Members of Parliament for the District. The Bill was passed by the House of Commons, but it has been thrown out by the Committee of the House of Lords. The Public Libraries Bill consolidates and amends the existing law on this subject and it meets a difficulty which the Board pointed out to the promoters of the Amendment Act, 1890, might arise from one of the provisions of that Act in the adoption of the Public Libraries Acts by a parish similarly situated to the parish of Tooting in this District. The Board therefore supported the Bill. A Conference of Vestries and District Boards has been held at the Westminster Town Hall with the view of taking united action with regard the National Telephone Bill and the New Telephone Bill, if necessary, for the protection of the interests of the Local Authorities. 25 No action has, at present, been taken by the Board with regard to the other Bills in the foregoing list. Removal of subsoil from site of Street As stated in the last annual report evidence was given before the Parliamentary Committee on behalf of the Board in support of the Metropolis Management Amendment Act, 1890, one of the provisions of which the Board understood to be intended to empower Vestries and District Boards, if they thought fit, to prohibit the removal of the sub-soil from the site of an intended new road. Upon the plan of a proposed new road (Brayburne Avenue, Clapham) being submitted the Board refused their approval to the excavation of any sand, gravel, or sub-soil frOm the site beyond what was necessary to level or to form a foundation for the paving, metalling, or flagging of the road. The owner having declined to comply with the order of the Board in the matter was summoned for an infringement of the Act and the magistrate decided in favor of the defendant. The Board appealed, and the Divisional Court, consisting of Mr. Justice Hawkins and Mr. Justice Wills, after taking time to consider their judgment, dismissed the appeal. Mr. Justice Hawkins in delivering judgment said the language of the Act was not such as was calculated to throw very much clearness upon the interpretation to be put upon it, but that upon the best consideration their lordships could give to the case it appeared to them that the respondent was right, and that there was no power conferred upon the District Board absolutely to refuse to allow, under any circumstances, any sand, gravel or sub-soil to be taken from land upon which a street had been formed or wholly or in part laid out; that the power given to the Board under those circumstances was only to impose conditions, which might be as stringent as it was possible to make them, and that the expression in the Act "refuse their approval" referred only to cases where gravel or other B 26 sub-soil had already been excavated and it was proposed to form a road over the site, and that in such cases the road could not be made unless the excavation had been filled up to the satisfaction of the Board. The Board have requested the London County Council, who promoted the Act, to take an early opportunity of amending it so as to empower Local Authorities to prohibit the removal of sub-soil from the sites of proposed new roads in cases in which they consider it necessary to do so. The Causeway, Wandsworth. The proceedings taken by the Board against the owner of the Causeway Flour Mills, for stopping up a railway arch by the side of the River Wandle, at the Causeway, Wandsworth, which have extended over more than two years, were brought to an end at the Newington Session, on the 17th of February, when the defendant having, in accordance with the order of the Court, removed the obstruction, and having also agreed to pay the Board £160 for their costs in the matter, was bound over to keep the peace. Jews Row Footpath. During the past year a portion of the old footpath which runs parallel with the road in Jews Row, Wandsworth, has been stopped up by an order of Quarter Sessions, the Tramways Company having given up to the Board sufficient land in front of their premises to widen Jews Row to 40 feet. The Board purpose taking the necessary steps for closing the remaining portion of this footpath, and for continuing the widening of Jews Row to 40 feet throughout. Footpath, Wandsworth Common. Application has been made by the Authorities of Magdalen College, Oxford, to stop up the footpath between Magdalen Road and Wandsworth Common, on the ground that the same is useless now that the new road between these points has been laid 27 out. Upon application being made for the consent of the Wandsworth Vestry a Committee of the Vestry was appointed to meet the authorities of the College on the ground, and the Committee suggested that as a quid pro quo for the proposed stopping up of the footpath the College Authorities should give up and add to Wandsworth Common a strip of land 20 feet in width, skirting the Common between the point where the old footpath joins the Common and Burnt wood Lane: that between such strip of land and the proposed houses there should be a road formed 40 feet wide, that all the houses which might be built in such road should front towards the Common, and that the trees now standing on such strip of land should be allowed to remain. The Bursar of the College, however, stated that he was not disposed to recommend the College to comply with the request, as he could not see that the public would be in any way inconvenienced by the proposed stopping up of the footpath, the new road which had been formed by the College being shorter than the old footpath, and affording direct communication between the same points. No further steps have at present been taken in the matter. Tooting Bee Common. A proposal having been made that a piece of land forming part of the Bedford Hill Estate, which is being developed for building purposes, should be added to the Common, the matter was considered by the Board. The piece of land in question is about 3½ acres in extent, and is almost covered by a fine grove of trees. It was ascertained that the land could be purchased for £6,952. Some of the inhabitants in the locality were willing to contribute £1,800, and the County Council were willing to contribute one-half of the purchase money, leaving a balance of £1,676. The Board were of opinion that the cost beyond the £1,800 subscribed in this District should be a charge upon the whole of London, but rather than 28 lose the chance of securing such a desirable addition to the Common they agreed to contribute the balance of £1,676. One moiety of that sum will be paid by Streatham, in which parish the Common is situate, and the remainder by the other parishes in the District in proportion to their respective rateable values. Alteration of number of Members of Board. Upon the preliminary report of the Census of 1891 being published, the Board considered the subject of re-arranging the number of Members of the Board elected by the respective parishes comprising the District. The Board suggested to the London County Council that the number should be increased to 66, apportioned as follows, viz.:— Parish of Clapham, 18; Putney, 9; Streatham, 18; Tooting, 3; Wandsworth, 18. The London County Council, however, were unwilling to increase the number of Members beyond 63,—following the precedent of Sir Benjamin Hall in 1855, upon which basis the distribution would be as follows, viz.:— Parish of Clapham 15 as at present 15 ,, Putney 9 instead of 6 ,, Streatham 18 ,, 9 ,, Tooting Graveney, 3 as at present 3 ,, Wandsworth18 instead of 12 63 45 The Board thereupon suggested that the number of Members should be increased to 57, viz.:—Clapham, 15; Putney, 9; Streatham, 15; Tooting, 3; Wandsworth, 15; and pointed out that if the total number of Members were increased to 63, as proposed, the proportion to which each parish would be entitled (upon the basis taken of) inhabited houses, rateable value, and rated householders) 29 would be as follows, viz.:- Clapham, 16.91; Putney, 8.12; Streatham, 18.18; Tooting, 2.34; Wandsworth, 17.45; and that the parish of Clapham was therefore entitled to practically 17 Members, whilst under the scheme proposed by the Council only 15 would be given. The London County Council adhered to their view, and pointed out in support of it that in the 10 years between 1881 and 1891 the parish of Clapham had increased 25 per cent.; Streatham, 104 percent.; and Wandsworth, 71 per cent. in inhabited houses, and assuming that the ratio of increase goes on during the next ten years, for which the new distribution of Members is to last, the additional representation of Streatham and Wandsworth was fully justified. An order was accordingly issued by the Council increasing the number of Members to 63, in the proportions set out above. The additional Members were elected by the respective Vestries on the 1st of June. 30 ORDERS OF APPORTIONMENT. The following Orders of Apportionment of the estimated cost of paving new roads nave been made by the Board during the year, viz.:— Parish. Date of Order. Name of Road. Amount of Order. £ s. d. Clapham 24th Feb., 1892 Abbeville Road South 582 10 3 „ „ „ Lessar Avenue 620 8 0 Streatham 6th May, 1891 Larch Road 542 0 4 3rd June, „ Foulser Road 700 5 2 „ „ „ Romberg Road 474 4 7 „ „ „ Dafforne Road 706 3 1 18th Nov., „ Conyers Road (1st portion) 397 18 9 2nd Dec., „ Leverson Street (1st portion) 259 8 1 10th Feb., 1892 Elmfield Road 1,107 1 11 Wandsworth 3rd June, 1891 Nicosia Road 402 9 3 15th July, „ Beechcroft Road (2nd portion 303 14 9 „ „ „ Keswick Road (2nd portion) 449 17 3 18th Nov., „ Brocklebank Road (2nd portion) 443 3 0 „ „ „ Bucharest Road 385 5 6 „ „ „ Winfrith Road 392 6 5 2nd Dec., „ Beechcroft Road (3rd portion) 229 10 0 „ „ „ Coimbra Road 246 14 3 „ „ „ Lemuel Street 260 9 4 13th Jan., 1892 Allfarthing Lane (portion) 53 7 0 24th Feb., „ Dorlcote Road 350 1 1 „ „ „ Oakhill Road (2nd portion) 765 5 6 £9,672 3 6 The following Orders of Apportionment of the cost of executing necessary works of repair upon roads not repairable by the Board have been made by the Board during the year under the provisions of section 3 of the Metropolis Management Amendment Act, 1890, 53 and 54 Vic., chap. 66. Parish. Date of Order. Name of Road. Amount of Order. Putney 2nd Dec., 1891 Dryburgh Road 128 8 0 „ „ „ Egliston Road 69 10 6 „ „ „ Erpingham Road 208 2 8 Wandsworth 16th July 1891 Earlsfield Road (East extension) 126 1 4 £532 21 6 31 NEW ROADS. The following applications for the formation of new roads in this District have been made to the London County Council during the past year, viz.:— Clapham Putney Streatham Wandsworth Deviation in the level of Brayburne Avenue. Eagle House Estate (Hambalt Road, Mandalay Road, Shandon Road, Narbonne Avenue, Klea Avenue (in continuation), Abbeville Road (in continuation), and Deauville Road (in continuation). Out of the south side of Clapham Common.. „ „ „ (amended plan) Deviation in the formation of the eastern portion of Deauville Road „ „ „ (amended plan) Out of the east side of Rozel Road Out of Wirtemburg Street and High Street near the Pavement, and for the widening of Wirtemburg Street and Bromells Road On the Half Moon Estate „ „ „ (amended plan) „ ,, (further amended plan) „ „ „ „ „ (Rotherwood Road) Between Clarendon Road and Dryburgh Road (Clarendon Road in continuation) On the south Streatham Estate „ ,, (amended plan) Ampney Road, Pasture Road, and Sax- mundham Road Deviation in the formation of Blegborough Road On the Leigham Court Estate (Amesbury Avenue, Barcombe Avenue, Cricklade Avenue, Downton Avenue, Emsworth Street, Faygate Road, Hailsham Avenue, Keymer Road, Lyndhurst Avenue, Mountfield Road, Hillside Road (in continuation) and Nuthurst Avenue) Between Balham High Road and Elmbourne Read (Louisville Road) Out of the north side of Greyhound Lane Between Balham High Road and Oldridge Road (Caistor Road) „ „ „ (amended plan) Out of the east and west sides of Merton Road Out of East Hill and St. Ann's Hill,— Bramblebury Estate (Melody Road, Cicada Road, Dault Road, Trefoil Road, Jessica Road, Quarry Road, and Greraldine Road. On the Wimbledon Park Estate (Elsenham Street, Replingham Road, Heythorp Road, Brookwood Road, Clonmore Street, Engadine Street, Elborough Street, ham Street, and Astonville Road) Out of the east side of Merton Road (amended plan) Plan approved. Plan approved. Plan objected to. Under consideration. Plan objected to. Plan approved. Under consideration Plan objected to. Plan objected to. Plan objected to. Plan objected to. Plan approved. Plan approved. Plan objected to. Plan approved. Plan objected to. Plan approved. Plan approved. Under consideration. Plan approved. Plan objected to. Plan objected to. Plan approved. Plan approved. Plan objected to. 32 RE-NAMING STREETS AND EE-NUMBERING HOUSES. The following orders relating to this District have been issued by the London County Council during the past year, viz.:— Parish. Date of Order. Name of Street. Clapham & Streatham 20th October, 1891 Alderbrook Road, to be re-numbered. Putney 28th April, 1891 Norroy Road, to be re-numbered. 12th May, 1891 Chelverton Road, to be re-numbered. Streatham 28th July, 1891 Hildreth Street, to be re-numbered. „ „ „ Palace Road, to be re-numbered. 20th October, 1891 Bedford Hill Road, to be re-named Bedford Hill, and the houses there re-numbered. 3rd November, 1891 Lewin Road, to be re-numbered. 17th „ „ Balham Hill to be re-named and the houses there re-numbered. „ „ „ Balham High Road, to be re-named and the houses there re-numbered. „ „ „ Balham Road, to be re-named Upper Tooting Road, and the houses there re-numbered. 1st December, 1891 Balham Park Road, to be re-numbered. „ „ „ Heslop Road, to be re-numbered. Wandsworth 2nd June, 1891 Bucharest Road, to be re-numbered. Eglantine Road, to be re-numbered. Brocklebank Road, to be re-numbered. Swaffield Road, (southern side of) to be renumbered. Penwith Street, to be re-numbered. Wilna Road, to be re-numbered. Bassingham Road, to be re-numbered. Winfrith Road, to be re-numbered. 33 SEWERS. In the Parish of CLAPHAM 1 manhole shaft, a surface ventilator, and 10 new gullies have been constructed; 5 surface ventilators have been closed and iron pipe ventilators erected instead thereof, 852 feet of new pipe sewers, 4 manholes, and 37 new gullies have been constructed in new roads at the cost of the owners of adjoining property. In the Parish of PUTNEY 630 feet of new 12 pipe sewers with 4 manholes and 10 gullies in connection therewith, have been constructed in new roads by the owners of the property there, under the superintendence of the Board. The sewer at Laborers Cottages, Putney Lower Common, was taken up and relaid by the Board's own men, and an inspection pit built at a cost of £12 19s. 1d. Two drains with catchpits have been constructed to convey the water away from Kingston Road, near the Kingsmere Pond, at a cost of £28 11s. 5d. The culvert under Portsmouth Road, near the Scio Pond, having fallen in, was rebuilt at a cost of £20 0s. 9d. Nineteen new gullies have been constructed by the Board at a cost of £111 0s. 11d., and various alterations to manholes, gullies, and sewers carried out at a cost of £31 5s. 6d. The gullies, numbering 813, have been regularly cleansed, emptied, and disinfected, and all sewers and manholes have been regularly and frequently flushed. In the Parish of STREATHAM 7971 feet of new sewers, 18 manholes, 15 ventilators, and 10 gullies, with about 300 feet of 6 pipe drains thereto, have been constructed during the year, and sewer junctions have been provided for 82 gullies not yet constructed, all under the supervision of the officers of the Board, at the cost of the owners of the estates, or others, where new roads have been laid out; the cost is estimated at £2200. One of 34 those sewers, about 830 feet of 15 inch pipes with manholes and gullies, has been laid in Rosendale Road, by and at the expense of the L. and N.W. Railway Company, for the immediate purpose of draining their new coal depot, and the road leading to it; and also for draining the houses when built, upon the understanding that the owners of property draining into it shall repay to the Company their fair proportion of the cost of the construction. About 600 feet of 6" and 400 feet of 4 pipes have been laid along the ditch on the west side of Streatham Common, at a cost of £34 10s. 4d., and the surface thus gained has been added to the public pathway there. Three additional sewer ventilating shafts have been erected against the houses, Nos. 92, 95, and 109, Wellfield Road, with the permission of the owners, at a cost of £16 9s. 6d. Thirty-four gullies, with 476 feet of 6" drains and four ventilators have been provided and fixed in various roads, and all the sewers, gullies, manholes, &c., have been repaired, altered, cleansed, flushed, and disinfected at a cost of £66 7s. 9d. for repairs and £327 0s. 1d. for cleansing. The London County Council have nearly completed their 4' 0" × 2' 8" storm water sewer along Mitcham Lane, about 2260 feet in length, from Thrale Road to the "Wandle Branch" at Roe Bridge. This is calculated to afford considerable relief from flooding to the inhabitants of West Streatham, and to others along the vicinity of the main sewers through Balham and Clapham. 35 The sum of £85 1s. 0d. has been expended in the maintenance of the public urinals at Bedford Hill and Streatham Hill, and the underground convenience near Streatham Church. The pennies collected at the underground convenience during the year amounted to £10 6s. 9d. In the Parish of TOOTING the cost of repairing and cleansing sewers has been £15 17s. 4d. In the Parish of WANDSWORTH the total length of new sewers constructed during the past year was about 11,860 feet of 12" pipe, 830 feet of 15" pipe, and 130 feet of 9" pipe. The covered sewers have been cleansed and flushed where practicable, and the solid matter lifted out and carted away. 36 PARTICULARS OF NEW SEWERS. PARISHES. LOCALITIES. Lengths & Sizes - feet lineal 18 in. Pipe Sewer. 15-in. Pipe Sewer. 12-in. Pipe Sewer. 9-in. Pipe Sewer. Clapham Brayburne Avenue .. 186 666 .. Putney Rotherwood Road .. .. 600 .. Gwendolen Avenue •• .. 30 .. Streatham Childebert Road .. .. 1008 .. Carminia Road .. .. 952 .. Cloudesdale Road .. 300 796 .. Huron Road 868 860 .. .. Elmbourne Road 540 .. 32 .. Bushnell Road .. 58 .. .. Sainfoin Street .. 306 264 .. Manville Road .. 104 .. .. Killieser Avenue (rear of) .. 753 .. 300 Rosendale Road .. 830 .. .. Wandsworth Crieff Road .. .. 713 .. Killarney Road .. .. 461 .. Swanage Road .. .. 630 .. Barmouth Road .. .. 1053 .. Jeypore Road .. .. 425 .. Cader Road .. .. 399 .. Galesbury Road .. .. 287 .. Huntsmoor Road .. .. 894 .. Geddes Road .. .. 879 50 Beechcroft Road .. .. 330 .. Routh Road .. .. 627 .. Lyford Road .. .. 968 80 Melody Road .. 84 1367 .. Cicada Road .. 202 607 .. Geraldine Road .. .. 90 .. Trefoil Road .. .. 598 .. Quarry Road .. .. 526 .. Wandsworth Common(west side) .. .. 216 .. Franchecourt Road .. .. 514 .. The Grove Avenue .. .. 276 .. Podmore Road .. 544 .. .. Totals 1408 4227 16208 430 37 PRIVATE DRAINS. The following are the particulars of the Private Drains which have been constructed by the Board during the past year, the cost of which has been paid by the persons for whom the work was executed:— Parishes. No. of Drains. No. of Houses &c., drained thereby. Lengths and sizes—feet lineal. 18-in. l5-in. 12-in. 9-in. 6-in. Total lengths. Clapham 142 185 .. .. .. 26 2940 2966 Putney 53 53 .. .. .. 20 1243 1263 Streatham 151 244 4 82 139 914 1882 3021 Tooting 9 13 .. .. .. .. 207 207 Wandsworth 75 150 .. .. 96 510 1008 1614 Totals 430 645 4 82 235 1470 7280 9071 In the Parish of Streatham, in addition to the above, 270 drains (comprising 4450 feet of 9 inch and 1600 feet of 6 inch pipe drains) have been laid under new roads at the time of and in conjunction with the construction of new sewers; these are intended to drain about 502 houses when built. Thus an aggregate of nearly 4¼ miles of sewers and drains have been laid under public roads and paths for various purposes during the year. The numbers of inspections made and recorded in the drain inspection books were as follows:—In the Parish of Clapham 967: Putney 502; Streatham 1,450; Tooting 35; Wandsworth 1,039.—Total 3,993. The number of houses and buildings comprised in the foregoing inspections were: In Clapham 160; Putney 117; Streatham 463; Tooting 19; Wandsworth 263.—Total 1,022. 38 NUISANCES. In the Parish of Clapham 3,159 houses and premises have been inspected, and 1,539 notices for the abatement of nuisances have been served and complied with; 145 houses have been disinfected after infectious disease had occurred there. The sum of £39 has been expended in the purchase of disinfectants, £83 in disinfection of bedding, and £1 in stripping rooms. In the Parish of Putney 3,570 houses and premises have been inspected; 688 first and 150 second notices have been served to remedy sanitary defects. Forty houses have been fumigated after the occurrence of infectious disease. In the Parish of Streatham 4,728 inspections of houses and business premises have been made during the year, and the results duly recorded and acted upon. The slaughter-houses, cow-houses, and bake-houses have also been inspected and reported upon to the Sanitary Committee, and all the necessary improvements, cleansing, &c., have been carried out; 657 notices for the abatement of nuisances have been served and attended to; 166 rooms in 119 houses have been fumigated, disinfected, and cleansed after infectious diseases; in 11 cases the bedding, &c., was burned, and in 45 cases the infected articles were properly stoved and returned to their owners ; the cost to the Board was about £38. An additional Sanitary Inspector has been appointed for the purpose of carrying out more effectively the increased duties cast upon the authority by the passing of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. 39 In the Parish of Tooting 525 houses and premises have been inspected, and 89 notices for the abatement of nuisances have been served and complied with; 21 rooms in 9 houses have been fumigated and disinfected. In the Parish of Wandsworth 1,650 complaints of nuisances have been received and entered in the complaint book; 860 notices have been served, 273 houses have been fumigated and disinfected; 24 accumulations of dung and offensive matter removed; 13 pig nuisances abated; 220 drains and closets unstopped; 149 offensive smells abated; 147 dust bins constructed; 5,l59 houses inspected, and the water closet apparatus improved in cases. The causes of many of the complaints were removed without notice. Legal proceedings were taken where necessary to enforce the notice served. 40 HIGHWAYS. The following are the particulars of the quantities of the materials used in the repairs of the roads and footpaths within the district during the past year, viz.:— Materials. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth Total cube yards. Guernsey Granite 264 .. .. 703 1994 2961 Guernsey Granite Siftings .. 105½ .. .. .. 105½ Cornish Stone 1482 .. 1342 .. 911 3735 Cornish Stone Siftings .. 139½ .. .. .. 139½ Cornish Stone Chippings .. .. 130 .. .. 130 Kentish Pit Flints 2055 1732 118 .. 217 4122 Stone Gravel 605 162½ 3187 215 1740 5909½ Cockle Shell 90 .. .. .. 90 Fine Gravel 586 309 331 116 1803 3145 Hard Core .. 163 .. .. 175 338 Ballast .. 165½ .. .. .. 165½ Knderby Granite .. .. 740 .. .. 740 Fine material for binding .. .. .. .. 150 150 Shingle .. .. .. .. 282 282 Ashes .. .. .. .. 159 159 Totals 5082 2777 5848 1034 7431 22172 In the Parish of Putney, in addition to the foregoing materials used in the repair of highways, 293 yards of ballast and 115 yards of sand have been used in sanding roads during frosty weather, and 222 yards of ballast have been used in making concrete for foundations of new buildings at the new wharf. The old granite from High Street has also been extensively used in repairing roads. In the Parish of Streatham about 1086 loads of old road material, excavated from the tramways and wood paving works on Brixton Hill and Streatham Hill, were carted, sifted, and used in repairing parish roads and paths; 152 cubic yards of fine gravel and sand were used on slippery roads; and 410 yards of stone gravel have been used in improvements. 41 The total length of road repaired by the Board is now 111¾ miles, showing an increase of about 2¼ miles during the year. The following are the lengths in each Parish:— Parishes M. F. Y. Clapham 26 3 1ll Putney 20 7 47 Streatham 31 6 185 Tooting 5 3 112 Wandsworth 27 1 21 Total 111 6 36 The above table does not include the following lengths of public ways which are used as footpaths only, viz.:— Clapham 2 miles 7 furlongs; Putney 1 mile 6 furlongs 70 yards; Streathnm 4 miles 3 furlongs 1.10 yards; Tooting 345 yards; Wandsworth 1 mile 4 furlongs.— Total, 10 miles 6 furlongs 85 yards. c 42 PARISH OF CLAPHAM. The portion of Alderbrook Eoad between Lysias Road and Streatham Parish boundary, the portion of Crescent Lane between Elms Road and Park Hill, Tremadoc Road, Lynette Avenue, and Western Lane have been paved and adopted by the Board at a total cost of £8,087 3s. 1d. paid by the owners of adjoining property. The total length of road adopted is 5 furlongs 21 yards. The work executed comprised 1,162 yards super 2½" York paving, 2,848 yards super tar-paving, 567 yards super 4" and 114 yards super 5 wood block paving, 820 yards super 5" × 6" granite channelling laid on 6 inches of Portland cement concrete, and 3,790 feet lineal of 12" × 8" granite kerb, 337 cubic yards of hardcore; 574 cubic yards of stone gravel and 663 cubic yards of flints were placed on the roads and rolled with the steam roller. The steam roller has worked 180 days during this (the sixth) year. On 30 of these days the roller was employed in making up new roads. This work is charged to the new roads account. The cost is as follows, viz:— £ s. d. Wages (including watching and cleaning) 113 13 1 Coke (61 chaldrons) 32 18 0 Oil, waste, and firewood 19 0 4 Repairs, including a new fire box and front rollers 100 8 2 Total cost of 180 days working £265 19 7 50 per cent, has already been written off for depreciation. Daily Cost. £ s. d. Wages 0 12 7½ Coke 0 3 7¾| Oil, waste, &c. 0 2 1½ Repairs 0 11 2 £1 9 6¾ 43 The paving of the roadway in Thurlow Street, situated between the Wandsworth Road and the Midland Railway Goods Station has been completed with 4" Tees Scoriae and Leicestershire granite paving laid on 6" of Portland cement concrete at a cost of £276. The labor was supplied by the Board. Detail. £ s. d. Excavation and concrete, 525 yards super at 4s. 6d. 118 2 6 4" Tees Scoriæ Paving, 345 yards super at 5s. l½d. 88 8 2 4" Granite Paving, 180 yards super at 7s. 8½d. 69 7 6 £275 18 2 An improvement has been made on the east side of the Chase by setting back a wall and thereby adding 196 feet super to the public way at a cost of £10. The footpath was kerbed and paved with tar-paving and a carriage entrance formed with blue Staffordshire bricks at an additional cost of £27. £ s. d. 143 feet run 12" × 8" Kerb 14 0 0 102 yards super tar-paving 10 0 0 10 yards super Staffordshire blue brick paving 3 0 0 £27 0 0 The following sums have been expended in paving repairs, viz.:— £ s. d. For Granite and York Paving 182 0 0 For Asphalte 206 0 0 For Tar 100 0 0 For Tar Dressing, 49,000 yards super 236 0 0 £724 0 0 The cost of repairs to gas and water trenches for the year, paid for by the several Companies, has been £1,143 7s. 6d. including the sum of £755 9s. 2d. the 44 cost of reinstating a main trench opened by the South Metropolitan Gas Company in Clapham Road, High Street, and Clapham Common, and extending the full length of the parish from the boundary of Lambeth on the north to the boundary of Streatham parish on the south. PARISH OF PUTNEY. An improvement has been effected at the north western corner of Charlwood Road bridge by the setting back of the boundary fence of No. 1, Charlwood Road, and the substitution of a brick wall therefor. The cost of this work was £21 16s. 0d. The Metropolitan Drinking Fountain Association have fixed a drinking fountain on the embankment, at its junction with Ashlone Road, and also one on the Kingston Road at its junction with the old Portsmouth Road. No new roads have been adopted by the Board, but Dryburgh Road, Egliston Road, Erpingham Road, Wymond Street, and Fanthorpe Street have been repaired and the cost charged on the owners of property therein, under the provisions of 53 & 54 Vic., cap. 66. The whole length of these roads is 658 yards; 1,282 cubic yards of flints and gravel and 89 cubic yards of hard core and ballast were used in repairing them. The new wharf and dock have been completed and the foundations for the necessary buildings these are now being laid by men in the employ of the Board. The cost of this work to March 25th was £104 4s. 6d. During the past year the embankment wall having bulged and slipped in several places owing to the heavy rains and high tides soaking through behind and below 45 it, it was found necessary to close pile the toe of the wall. This has now been completed at a cost of £919 10s. 9d. The High Street is now paved with creosoted wood blocks. The total cost of this work including cartage of surplus material, alteration to kerb, crossings, &c., amounted to £3,519 1s. 0d. The various paving works carried out during the past year, exclusive of new roads and the alterations in High Street, amounted to a total cost of £812 3s. 11d. and are distributed as follows, viz.:— £ s. d New 3" tar-paving, High Street, Roehampton 3 6 8 New York paving, High Street 130 16 3 New kerb and channel, Upper Richmond Road East 52 12 5 Reset kerb and channel do. do. 64 8 4 New 3" tar-paving, Quill Bridge 2 10 4 Ee-topping tar-paving, St. John's Road East 97 8 4 Reset kerb in Portsmouth Road 6 1 10 New kerb, channel, Victoria paving on west side of Putney Hill 300 0 0 Private works, gas and water trenches, and various small repairs 154 19 9 £812 3 11 The quantity of materials used in the above works is as follows, viz.:—620 square yards of 2" Victoria stonepaving; 1,480 square yards of crossings and channels relaid; 218 square yards of 3 tar-paving; 1,009 square yards York paving relaid; 906 feet run new 12" x 8" kerb; 32 feet run 12 x 6 kerb; 2,092 feet run granite kerb reset and jointed; 146 square yards new 2½" York, silex brand; 18 square yards of 3" York; 149 square yards 2^ York and 50 square yards of new blue bricks. 46 The steam roller has worked 175½ days; on 30½ days it was employed on new roads, the cost of which will be charged to the owners of property in such roads. The cost of working the roller during the past year has been as follows, viz.:— £ s. d. Wages of driver and flagboy, including time for cleaning 67 18 3 Coke, 50 chaldrons at 12s. 6d. 31 5 0 Oil, waste, &c. 6 18 4½ Repairs 2 6 5 Insurance 2 11 8 Compensation for accident 8 0 0 * Depreciation (10 per cent. on first cost) 37 0 0 Total cost of 175½ days working £155 19 8½ * 14 1/6 per cent. has now been written off for depreciation. Daily Cost. £ s. d. Wages, including cleaning 0 7 8¾ Coke 0 3 6¾ Oil, waste, &c. 0 0 9½ Repairs 0 0 3¼ Insurance 0 0 3½ Compensation for accident 0 0 11 Depreciation 0 4 2½ £0 17 9¼ PARISH OF STREATHAM. The Balham and Tooting Tramways are in full work, and the roads which they occupy are in good condition, paved throughout with granite setts between the tram rails, and with wood blocks at the sides. The omnibuses have ceased to run. The widening of the road referred to in previous reports has now been completed. The entire cost to the Board, including the work executed, purchase of property, and (Solicitors' and Valuers' charges amounted to .£2,036 15s. 11d. 47 The London Tramways Company have extended their double line of tramways from Brixton to a point between Tierney Road and Telford Avenue, Streatham Hill, 2 furlongs 2 chains of it being in the parish of Streatham. Slot rails and other appliances under ground have been provided for working the tram-cars all the way between Kennington and Streatham Hill by cable with stationary engines, &c., to be placed on the site of "Llanberis" now No. 29, Streatham Hill. This extension was officially inspected by Major General Hutchinson, of the Board of Trade, on the 11th August, 1891, but hitherto the cars have been drawn by horses, the cable system not being ready. The Board has purchased for £350 a piece of freehold land having an area of nearly half an acre, situate at the western end of Larch Road, Balham, for parish purposes. The ground, which was very low, has been raised about 3 feet and the foundations for fence walls along three sides have been constructed of Portland cement concrete, to about 4 feet above the ground, in manner suitable for the erection of stables, cart sheds, and other buildings thereon at a cost of £125 1s. 1d. The Board has also agreed to purchase another site called "Park Lodge," Streatham, for £3,500, subject to the title &c., proving satisfactory. This site contains an area of over an acre and a quarter, a good house, with stables, &c., suitable for parochial offices, conveniently situate, with access from Streatham High Road and from Ellora Road and Hambro Road. An additional Road Foreman has been engaged and there is now one for each of the three wards. The charges for reinstating trenches made for gas, water and telegraph purposes, during the year amounted to £428 7s. 9d. 48 A 10 ton steam roller has been used in the repairing of parish roads for 139½ days at a cost of £313 17s. 6d., and in the making up and paving of new roads and consolidating trenches for 60¾ days at a cost of £136 13s. 9d. The following are the new roads which have been paved and adopted during the year, viz.:—Harberson Road, Hambro Road, Croxted Road, Dalmore Road, Babington Road, Beechcroft Road, Foulser Road, Dafforne Road, Inverleith Avenue, Riggindale Road, Larch Road, and Romberg Road; total length 1 mile, 6 furlongs, 206 yards. The estimated cost of making up and paving these new roads under the annual contracts of the Board, amounted to about £6,719 15s. 2d., and the materials used in this work included 15,498 feet of new granite kerb, 2,410 super yards of paved channel and crossings, 15,089 super yards of tar-paving, 4,822 cubic yards of gravel and flints, and the refixing of 4,030 feet of old kerb. On Brixton Hill and Streatham Hill the paving of the roadway between the tram rails has been done by the London Tramways Company, with 3" × 6" granite setts, and the margins between the rails and the kerb, average width about 10 feet 8 inches, have been paved by the Board with 3" x 9" x 6" deal blocks laid upon 6" of Portland cement concrete; thus 2,687 super yards of wood pavement were laid by Messrs. Turner, Son & Evanson, at a cost of £1,141 16s. 8d., and £24 7s. 8d. for Clerk of Works, total cost £1,166 4s. 4d.; towards which the Tramways Company paid £215 1s. 2d. for paving a width of 2 feet on each side of their tramways. 49 The old stones removed from the crossings and channel along the line of the tramways were used for paving around water posts and in crossings and channel as follows, viz.:— Where used. Super Yards Cost. £ s. d. Streatham High Road, (round water post) 8 1 4 1 Thrale Road, (round water post) 10 1 10 1 Mitcham Lane, (round water post) 10 1 10 1 Leigham Court Road, (round water post) 8 1 4 1 Christ Church Road, (round water post) 8 1 4 1 Maderia Road, (water post and channel) 18½ 2 15 6 Streatham Common, S. (water post) 10 1 10 1 Streatham Common, N. (water post) 10 1 10 1 Streatham Place, (channel) 55 8 5 0 137½ 20 13 1 In Streatham Place about 160 yards of Hobman's best limestone tar-paving has been substituted for old worn out York flags, and 3,622 feet of old paving, kerbing, and channelling have been relaid at a cost of about £38 11s. 8d. On Brixton Hill and Streatham Hill the old Purbeck kerb, on the east side, has been removed and carted to Dragmire Lane and 1,050 feet of new 6" × 12" granite kerb has been laid in its place; and on the west side about 130 feet of York flags and 107 yards of tar-paving have been laid in front of the new shops at a cost of £107 9s. 6d. In Streatham High Road, near the Tate Library, the road has been widened, re-kerbed, and made good with 250 feet of new kerb. A wood paved crossing 12 feet 50 wide opposite the library door, a granite crossing at Pinfold Road, and about 285 yards of new tar-paving have been laid down at a cost of £78 11s. 4d. On the west side of Streatham High Road between Park Lodge and Natal Road, the old York flairs have been removed to the stores and replaced by Victoria stone paving, and the tar-paving made good, at a cost of about £87 0s. 4d. In Thrale Road, near Tooting Common, 551 feet of granite edge kerb have been laid and the path re-gravelled at a cost of £48 5s. 3d. The improvement of Dragmire Lane has been gradually proceeded with as the ground for widening was given up; 783 feet of old kerb from Brixton Hill have been refixed, a footpath formed, and the road widened. The sum spent on it during the year amounts to £135 8s. 7d. A long desired improvement has been effected to the footpath on the north side of Chestnut Grove by the adoption of a give-and-take line of fence, and the removal of the low fence in front of the old cottage belonging to Mr. C. Curtis. The present cost is only 15s. 2d. In Mitcham Lane, south west of Thrale Road, an important strip of land has been conveyed to the Board by Mr. Aspinall for the purpose of widening the road to 50 feet. The Board's workmen have levelled the hedge and made other preparations at a cost of £25 5s. 4d., less £4 2s. 0d. received for roots and mould. Further progress was necessarily deferred for the construction of the storm sewer by the London County Council. 51 In Streatham High Road, between the Church and the "White Lion," the widening of the footpath and the compulsory purchase and removal of a dangerously projecting wall has greatly improved the public way at a total cost of £92 14s. l0d. The Board is in treaty with the owners of some property in Wellfield Road, with the view of widening and otherwise improving the narrowest part of such road near the baker's shop. The entrance from Mitcham Lane to Babington Road has been greatly improved by a give-and-take arrangement with the London County Council, in whom Streatham Green is vested. Babington Road with its improved entrance has been paved and adopted as a parish road. The necessary repairs have been effected to the paving, kerbing, crossings, channels, wood paving, and turpaving, in all parts of the parish, at a cost of £501 7s. 9d. The new materials used in the above works were 1,986 feet of granite kerb, 603 feet super of granite setts, 333 feet super of York paving, and 2,565 feet super of Victoria stone paving. About 24,422 feet super of old stone and brick paving, kerbing, stone pitching, and wood paving, have been taken up and relaid. There have also been 4,482 super yards of new tar-paving laid down, 7,220 super yards of old tar-paving retopped, and 16,532 super yards refaced with tar grit and shell. PARISH OF TOOTING. During the last year only a small portion of paving has been done, but the Board have decided to pave the carriage way of the High Street with wood, and Messrs. J. Mowlem & Co's. tender for the works has been 52 accepted at 9s. 11d. per yard. The York paving on one side of the High Street is to be relaid with Victoria stone, the other side being relaid with the best portions of the York stones that are taken up. No new roads have been made during the last year, but the Board have ordered Bickersteth Road and Vant Road to be paved. The estimates and apportionments are now being prepared. A steam roller has been hired from the contractors for 26½ days. Payments amounting to £13 14s. 1d. have been received from the various Companies for repairs to gas and water trenches. PARISH OF WANDSWORTH. During the past year the following new roads have been adopted by the Board and the cost paid by the owners of the property abutting thereon, viz.:— Name of Road. Length in yards. Cost of work. £ s. d. Patten Road 336 356 1 9 Smeaton Road 371 403 14 1 Balvernie Grove 134 127 6 4 Nicosia Road 142 368 15 3 Keswick Road 419 261 2 9 1,402 £1,517 0 2 The necessary works of repair were executed to the following roads under the provisions of the Metropolitan Management (Amendment) Act, 1890, at the cost of the owners of property abutting thereon, viz.:— Length Coat of work. Name ot Road. in yards. £ s. d. Augustus Road 280 382 12 8 Albert Road 116 11113 Earlsfield Road Extension* 166 126 14 9 562 £620 8 8 * The Board subsequently agreed to adopt this road as a parish road. 53 The total quantity of footway paving and granite kerbing executed during the past year is as follows, viz.:— 5,781 feet lineal 12" x 8" granite kerb, 150 yards super old York paving, 237 yards super pitchings for channel, 2,331 yards super new tar-paving for repairs to trenches, 2,388 yards super new tar-paving for topping, and 25,182 yards super new tar-paving refacing and sanding. The distribution and cost of the above work is as follows, viz.:— £ s. d. Garrett Lane, 4" x 4" channel laid from corner of Earlsfield Road to gully on south, side of railway arch and from Sailor Prince p.h. to gully on south side of railway arch, and a 4" x 4" crossing constructed opposite the entrance to railway station on the south side 111 5 2 St. Ann's Hill, from corner of Ridgmount Road to Mr. Mopsey's houses, new 12" x 8" kerb laid, footpath tar-paved and carriage way raised and widened 5 feet 73 5 8 High Street, corner of South Street, fountain taken down cleaned, repaired, painted and refixed in centre of High Street and South Street, with new 4 burner Sugg's patent lamp on top, and refuge with iron posts constructed 24 1 31 Putney Bridge Road, corner of Cedars Road, footpath tar-paved and 12" x 8" kerb laid 31 19 0 Merton Road, in front of Board School, footpath tar- paved and 12" x 8" kerb fixed 38 0 0 High Street, carriage entrances at Town Hall taken up and relaid with new Staffordshire blue bricks 17 1 8 Trinity Road, 5" x 4" crossing constructed at end of Dalebury Road, and new 12" x 8" circular corners 29 16 8 Putney Bridge Road, repairing footpath through allotments with ashes 9 10 6 Repairs to Gas and Water Companies' trenches 465 1 3 £800 13 0 54 DUSTING AND SCAVENGING. In the Parish of Clapham the number of loads of dust removed during the year was 6,361; the total cost of collection and disposal has been £2,492 17s. or about 7s. l0d. per load. The following is the expenditure for dusting during the year, viz.:— £ s. d. Cost of Collection 1,414 16 5 Cost of disposal, Newington Vestry and railway charges 1,026 14 3 Repairs and renewals of plant 57 18 4 2,499 9 0 Cr: Trade refuse (33 loads at 4s.) 6 12 0 £2,492 17 0 The scavenging work is performed by men employed by the Hoard and by hired carts; 10,658 one horse loads have been carted from the roads and 1,926 loads from gullies. The following is the cost for the year, viz.:— £ s. d. Sweepers' wages 1,932 0 0 Cartage 1,236 0 0 Shoots 637 0 0 Tools 144 0 0 £3,949 0 0 In the Parish of Putney the removal of house-refuse has been carried out by Mr. J. Ball for the sum of £518 6s. 8d. The scavenging is done by men employed by the Board and by hired horses and carts, the Board providing a shoot for the refuse. In the Parish of Streatham, Mr. George Neal has und rtaken to collect the dust from every house once in every fortnight and to remove it to a shoot outside the 55 district of the Board, or to some spot where the Medical Officer can certify it to be not injurious to health, for the sum of £1,265 a year for 3 years; this is £315 in excess of the cost of the previous year. The cost per house per annum is now about 3s. 5d. The rota system of collection adopted three years ago is still in satisfactory operation, and the whole time of a dust inspector is employed in watching over the collection, and reporting to the office daily all complaints, refusals, and requests of the householders, and the defaults of the contractor. The work for scavenging includes the emptying of the road gullies and the scrapiner and sweeping of all the parish roads, which is done by roadmen in the employ of the Board. The loading and carting of such cleansings have been let by contract to Mr. D. Childs, in Ward No. 1 for the sum of £195 per annum for 3 years, and in Wards Nos. 2 and 3 to Mr. G. Neal for 3 years for the sum of £900; per annum this is an increase of £150 on the previous year's cost. In the Parish of Tooting the removal of dust and house-refuse has been carried out by Mr. H. J. Santer under a three years' contract terminating 25th March, 1895, at a cost of £81. The work of emptying the road gullies and the scraping, sweeping, and heaping of the road cleansings is performed by the roadmen in the employ of the Board, and the carting away of such cleansings has been carried out by Mr. H. J. Santer under a three years' contract terminating 25th March, 1895, at a cost of £81. In the Parish of Wakdrwoeth the collecting and removal of dust and house-refuse was carried out by contract with Mr. Hudson for two years terminating on the 25th day of March, 1893, at £957 per annum. A dusting inspector has been appointed during the past year to superintend the work of collection. 56 The scavenging work is performed by men employed by the Board and by hired horses. REMOVAL OF SNOW. The cost of removing snow from the streets and sanding roads in the several parishes in the District was as follows, viz.:—Clapham £230 0s. 0d.; Putney £209 9s. 9d.; Streatham £246 18s. 7d.; Tooting £24 19s. l0d.; Wandsworth £26 5s. 2d.—Total, £737 13s. 4d. ROAD WATERING. The details of road watering during the past year are set forth in the following tabular statement:— PARISHES. Length of Road Watered. Expenditure. By Water Company. Horse Hire. New Carts, Vans and Standposts. Water, Labour. Pumping, and Repairs to Pumps, Carts, &c. Total Expenses. M. F. Y. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. *Battersea 0 1 110 — — — 12 0 0 Clapham 25 7 143 620 10 9 — 761 14 8 1370 5 5 Putney 20 7 47 290 9 8 5 3 6 349 18 1 645 11 3 Streatham 27 7 144 477 14 9 76 16 6 659 10 9 1214 2 0 Tooting 4 1 116 73 7 0 — 81 4 3 154 11 3 Wandsworth 23 3 52 376 18 8 — 530 12 0 807 10 8 Total 102 4 172 1839 0 10 82 0 0 2382 19 9 4304 0 7 *This watering is carried out by the Parish of Clapham as a matter of convenience and the cost paid to the Board by the Vestry of Battersea. In the Parish of Clapham the cost of road watering was £52 15s. 9d. per mile, of which £17 16s. 8d. was paid to the Water Company for the supply of water and hire of meters. In the Parish of Putney the cost of road watering was £30 17s. 8d. per mile, of which sum £12 3s. 0d. was paid to the Water Companies for the supply of water and hire of meters. 57 In the Parish of Streatham the watering season is for about seven months from the beginning of March to the middle of October. The following roads were added to the previous list for watering, viz.:— Harberson Read, Knollys Road, Inverleith Avenue, Tooting Bec Gardens, and Culmore Road, making the total length watered very nearly 28 miles. All the water was obtained by meter from the Lambeth Water Works Company, 9,311,000 gallons at 1s. per 1,000, high level; and 207,000 gallons at 8½d. per 1,000, low level. The total quantity used was 9,518,000 gallons, the cost of which, including the hire of meters and stand posts, amounted to £613 5s. 7d., being equal to £21 18s. 8d. per mile of road watered. The total cost of road watering amounted to £43 8s. 6d. per mile. In the Parish of Tooting the cost of road watering was £36 17s. 7d. per mile, of which £15 7s. 11d. was paid to the Water Company for the supply of water and hire of meters. The stand post which was opposite the London and South Western Bank in the Broadway has been removed and refixed opposite the Parish Stores in Defoe Road. In the Parish of Wandsworth the cost of road watering per mile was £38 15s. 6d., of which £16 19s. 9d. was paid to the Water Company for the supply of water and hire of meters. 58 NEW BUILDINGS. The details of the Notices for the erection of new buildings are as follows, viz.:— PARISHES. No. of Notices Received. No. of Houses. Additions to Houses, &c. Stabling, Warehouses, Shops and other Buildings. No. of Churches, Chapels, Schools, and Addition to same. Total number of Buildings. Clapham 40 158 2 13 - 173 Putney 60 111 14 24 — 149 Streatham 103 555 20 78 8 661 Tooting 12 35 1 — — 36 Wandsworth 114 263 5 2 1 271 Totals 329 1122 42 117 9 1290 LIGHTING. In the Parish of Clapham 10 ordinary lamps have been shifted during the past year, but there has been no additional lighting. In the Parish of Putney 14 lamps have been added in the district of the Wandsworth Gas Company, and 4 lamps discontinued, making a net increase of 10; 9 lamps have been removed and refixed in the district of the Wandsworth Gas Company and 4 in the district of the Brentford Gas Company. In the Parish of Streatham 17 ordinary street lamps have been added during the year, making the total number 997. In the Parish of Tooting 3 lamps have been added during the past year. In the Parish of Wandsworth 20 new lamps have been erected in the district of the Wandsworth & Putney Gas Company. The number of lamps lighted in the District on the 25th March, 1891, was 3,371 ordinary lamps and 58 large lamps. The details of the lamps now lighted ineach parish, and other particulars, are given in the following table, viz.:— 5§ DETAILS OF LIGHTING. PARISHES. WANDSWORTH & PUTNEY GAS COMPANY, (a) SOUTH METROPOLITAN GAS COMPANY MITCHAM GAS COMPANY. BRENTTORD GAS COMPANY. TOTAL NUMBER OF LAMPS IN EACH PARISH. Number of Lamps at £3 14s. 6d. By meter at 2s. 8d. per 1000 feet. Total Number. Number of Lampsat £3 13/ 9. Number of Lampsat £3 3/9. Number of Lampsat £5 12/0. Number of Lamps at £3 4/9. By meter at 2s. 3d. per 1000 feet. Total Number Number of Lamps at £4 4s. 0d. Number of Lamps at £3 7s. 6d. (b) By meter at | 3s. 8d. per 1000 feet. Total Number. Number of Lamps at £3 16s. 3d. Clapham — — — — 858 13 — 10 881 — — — — — 881 (c) Putney 448 — 448 — — — — — — — — — — 61 509 (d) Streatham — — — 43½ 808 41 4 4 900½ 17 79½ — 96½ — 997 Tooting — — — ½ — — — — ½ 7 118 3 128 — 128½ Wandsworth 957 — 957 — — — — — — — ½ — ½ — 957½ (e) Totals 1405 0 1405 44 1666 54 4 14 1782 24 198 3 225 61 3473 (a) The prices charged by the South Metropolitan Gas Company are subject to a discount of 5 per cent. (b) These lamps are extinguished at midnight. (c) Exclusive of one obelisk lamp, burning 30 cubic feet per hour, at £15 13s. 6d. per annum. (d) Exclusive of two 90-light Sugg's lamps fixed in front of the Railway Station, lighted by the L. & S. W. R. Company, and the cost of two ordinary street lamps only charged to the Board. (e) Exclusive of a 200-candle Bray's lamp at East Hill charged as two ordinary lamps, one 80-candle Bray's lamp at the Town Hall at £12 14s. id. per annum, one Schulke lamp at West Hill at £10 10s. 0d. per annum, one Sugg's four light lamp at fountain at £22 8s. 0d. per annum, and one double lamp at Summers town at £6 18s. 8d. per annum. 60 SALE OF FOOD, &c., ACTS. During the past year 250 samples of various articles of food and drink have been purchased by the Board and analysed by the public analyst. Of these 225 were reported to be genuine. In 3 cases, in which the articles were found to be slightly adulterated the vendors were cautioned.. In one case (seidleitz powder) reported to be very deficient in medicinal strength, the Board made no order in the matter. In 21 cases proceedings were taken against the vendors, with the following results, viz.:— Article. Case No. Extent of Adulteration. Fine or other result. Pepper Butter Milk „ „ „ „ Butter Milk „ Sweet Spirits of Nitre Prescription Milk „ „ „ „ „ Butter Milk Butter 53 59 83 85 96 126 138 166 172 176 177 178 192 202 216 257 267 274 279 289 292 50 per cent, Rice Flour and other matter 75 per cent. Margarine 17 ,, of added water 10 „ „ „ 13 „ „ „ 5 „ „ „ 14 „ „ „ 85 ,, of Margarine 17 ,, of added water 8 „ „ „ Deficient in Nitrous Ether Deficient 25 per cent of its active ingredient 9 per cent.of added water 18 „ „ „ 13 „ „ „ 46 „ „ „ Half-Skimmed and 7 per cent.of added water 12 per cent of added water 95,, of margarine 14 „ of added water 70 „ of margarine 5s. and 12s. 6d. costs. Summons withdrawn. 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs. 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs. 10s. and 12s. 6d. costs. Summons dismissed. £5 0s. 0. and 12s. 6d. costs. Defendants left the premises and could not be round. Summons withdrawn, as the article appeared to be in accordance with the British Pharmacopoeia in force. 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs. 10s. and 12s. 6d. costs. Summons withdrawn. 10s. and 12s. 6d. costs. £5 0s. 0d. and 12s. 6d. costs. £3 0s. 0d. and 12s. 6d. costs. 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs, £2 0s. 0d. and 12s. 6d. costs. 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs. 20s. and 12s. 6d. costs. 61 In case No. 59, the defendant proved that a label had been placed on the margarine and that it had fallen down. In cases Nos. 126 and 138 the summonses were dismissed on the grounds that the person who actuallyserved the milk should have been summoned, whereas the managers of the respective businesses were proceeded against. The magistrate refused leave to appeal, but the Board obtained a mandamus to compel a case to be stated. During the interval, however, in the case of "Brown v Foote" heard in the Queen's Bench Division the same point had been decided, and as the magistrate subsequently convicted the employer or manager in similar cases, the Board did not proceed further in the matter. The summons in case No. 202 was withdrawn at the suggestion of the magistrate, as he did not approve of the manner in which the sample was procured for analysis. In one case (a medical prescription) the chemist's assistant took up and kept the bottle of medicine on being told that it was to be analysed. He afterwards attended before the Board and apologised and after consideration of all the circumstances the Board decided not to take proceedings in the matter. 62 CENSUS RETURNS. The following are the particulars of the last three returns as regards population, and the last two returns as regards houses:- Parishes. Population. Number of Houses. Area. In 1871 In 1881 In 1891 Inhabited 1881 Inhabited 1891 Uninhabited 1891 Acres. Clapham 27347 36380 43698 5604 6994 318 1233 Putney 9439 13235 17771 2123 2987 235 2176 Streatham 12148 21611 42958 3452 7048 505 2904 Tooting 2327 3942 5784 715 1085 102 561 Wandsworth 19783 28004 46720 4249 7284 403 2478 Totals 71044 103172 156931 16143 25398 1563 9352 RATEABLE VALUE. The rateable value of the several parishes in the District is as follows:— PARISHES. Value as per Valuation List. £ s. d. Clapham 276326 0 0 Putney 164108 0 0 Streatham 332364 0 0 Tooting 27471 0 0 Wandsworth 276932 0 0 Total 1077201 0 0 63 SCHOOL BOARD PRECEPTS. The following are the amounts of the Precepts of the School Board for London paid by this District (omitting the Parish of Battersea):— Year. £ s. d. d. 1871-72 877 7 1 = .48 in the £ on rateable value 1872-73 1671 9 3 = .89 „ „ 1873-74 1381 14 10 = .74 „ „ 1874-75 3405 11 7 = 1.75 „ 1875-76 6012 17 3 = 3.00 „ „ 1876-77 9208 12 8 = 4.50 „ „ 1877-78 11818 9 8 = 5.23 „ „ 1878-79 12182 15 2 = 5.15 „ „ 1879-80 13579 1 3 = 5.50 „ „ 1880-81 16065 8 3 = 6.28 „ „ 1881-82 17106 3 5 = 6.15 „ „ 1882-83 17227 13 5 = 5.93 „ „ 1883-84 20890 10 5 = 6.86 „ „ 1884-85 25460 5 1 = 8.00 „ „ 1885-86 28944 4 10 = 8.64 „ „ 1886-87 32283 0 10 = 8.86 „ „ 1887-88 31203 16 2 = 8.36 „ „ 1888-89 30732 17 1 = 7.97 „ „ 1889-90 35367 3 6 = 8.88 „ „ 1890-91 43863 18 4 =10.68 „ „ 1891-92 47072 13 4 =10.71 „ „ (The foregoing rate is based upon the full rateable value. If empty houses, rate irrecoverable, and cost of collection are taken into account at least 1d. in the £ per annum should be added to arrive at the rate actually paid.) By order of the Board of Works for the Wandsworth District, HENRY GEORGE HILLS, Clerk to the Board. East Hill, Wandsworth, S.W., June, 1892, 64 STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS ENTERED INTO DURING THE YEAR ENDED 25th MARCH, 1892. Dates of Contracts. Names and Addresses of Contractors. Nature of Contracts. 1891. 22nd April. J. HORSFORD, Faversham, Kent. For the supply of pit flints in Clapham. for three years from the 25th March, 1891. „ D. CHILDS, Balham Hill. For scavenging in Ward No. 1, in Streatham (the like period). „ D. CHILDS, Balham Hill. For horse-hire (road watering, &c.) in Ward No. 1. Streatham, for one year from the 25th March,1891. „ D. CHILDS, Balham Hill. For the supply of flints and gravel in Ward No. 1, Streatham (the like period). „ J. S. GABRIEL, 67 & 69, Belvedere Road, Lambeth. For masons' and saviors' works in Streatham, (the like period). „ W. STANBURY, 2, Lebanon Gardens, Wandsworth, For drainage and jobbing works in Wandsworth, for three years from the 25th March, 1891. „ J. S. GABRIEL, 67 & 69, Belvedere Road, Lambeth. For the supply of York paving, granite kerb, &c., in Wandsworth (the like period). „ A. W. & E. LYNE, 61, Aldersgate Street, E.C. For the supply of bass brooms in the District, for one year from the 25th March, 1891. „ NOWELL & ROBSON, Warwick Road, Kensington. For wood paving works, High Street, Putney. 1st July. TURNER, SON, & EVANSON, Stanley Bridge Wharf, King's Road, Chelsea. For wood paving, Brixton Hill and Streatham Hill, Streatham. 15th „ McDOUGAIL BROS., 10, Mark Lane, E.C. For the supply of disinfectants in the District, for three years from the 25th March, 1891. 29th „ G. TREVES, 24, Oldridge Road, Balham. For cleansing works at the offices of the Board, East Hill, Wandsworth. 26th August H. R. DURMAN, 2, West Hill, Wandsworth. For repairing and painting slop carts in Wandsworth. 14th Oct. The PATENT VICTORIA STONE Co., Limited, 283a, Kingsland Road. For paving parts of the west side of Putney Hill and north side of Upper Richmond Road, Putney. 30th Dec. W. G. LACY, 82, East Hill, Wandsworth. For disinfection in the District, to 31st December, 1892, and thereafter subject to three months' notice. 1892. 4th March NEWINGTON VESTRY. For receiving dust and house refuse from Clapham, for one year from the 25th March, 1892. 9th „ H. COVINGTON, 3, Claverton Street, Pimlico. For the supply of gravel and flints in Putney (the like period). „ W. R. WILLIAMS, 86, High Street, Putney. For drainage and jobbing works in Putney, for three years, from the 25th March 1892. „ JOHN BALL, Lavender House, Sulhampstead Park Estate, Chiswick. For horse-hire in Putney (the like period). 65 STATEMENT OF CONTRACTS— Continued. Dates of Contracts. Names and addresses of Contractors. Nature of Contracts. 1892. 9th March C. NEWMAN, Merton Road, Tooting. For drainage and jobbing works in Streatham, for one year from the 25th March, 1892. „ J. S. GABRIEL, 67 & 69, Belvedere Road, Lambeth. For masons' and paviors' works in Streatham (the like period). „ A. C. W. HOBMAN & Co. Cliftonville, South Bermondsey. For tar paving in Streatham (the like period). „ G. NEAL, Wandsworth Common. For horse-hire (barge work) in Ward No. 1, Streatham, for one year from the 25th March, 1892. „ G. NEAL, Wandsworth Common. For horse-hire (barge work) in Wards Nos. 2 and 3, Streatham (the like period). „ G. NEAL, Wandsworth Common. For the supply of pit flints and fine gravel in Wards Nos. 2 and 3, Streatham (the like period). „ G. NEAL, Wandsworth Common. For tar-paving in Wandsworth (the like period). „ J. RUNNALLS, Penzance. For the supply of Cornish stone in the District, for three years from the 25th March, 1892. „ NOWELL & ROBSON. Warwick Road, Kensington. For the supply of Enderby or Narborough stone in the District (the like period). „ H. DOULTON & Co. 28, High Street, Lambeth. For the supply of stoneware pipes, &c., in the District (the like period). „ THE SOUTH METROPOLITAN GAS Co., 709a, Old Kent Road. For the supply of lamp columns in the District of the Board, lighted by such Company for one year from the 25th March, 1892. 23rd March E. & H. BEEVERS, Union Road, Borough. For masons' and paviors' work in Putney (the like period). „ D. CHILDS, Balham Hill. For supply of gravel and flints in Ward No. l, Streatham (the like period) „ J. CRONK, 33, Streatham Place, Brixton Hill. For supply of stone gravel in Ward No. 2, Streatham (the like period). „ J. CRONK, 33, Streatham Place, Brixton Hill. For supply of stone gravel in Ward No. 3, Streatham, for one year from the 25th March, 1892. „ T. DENMAN, 87, New Park Road, Brixton Hill. For supply of hand-picked surface flints in Wards Nos. 2 and 3, Streatham (the like period). „ D. CHILDS, Balham Hill. For horse-hire (road watering, &c.) in Ward No. 1, Streatham (the like period). „ J. CRONK, 33, Streatham Place, Brixton Hill. For horse-hire (road watering, &c.) in Wards Nos. 2 & 3, Streatham (the like period). „ J. MOWLEM & Co., Grosvenor Wharf, Westminster. For supply of Guernsey granite in the District, for three years from the 25th March, 1892. „ A. W. & E. LYNE, 61, Aldersgate Street, E.C. For supply of bass brooms in the District (the like period). „ STONEHEWER & WOODROFF, 138, High Street, Wandsworth. For printing minutes and notice papers for three years from the 25th March, 1892. 66 ESTABLISHMENT EXPENDITURE. £ s. d. Clerk 525 0 0 Solicitor 100 0 0 Office Clerks 750 14 0 Messenger and Office-keeper 99 19 0 Analyst's Fees 123 8 0 Inspector under Adulteration of Food, &c., Acts 129 17 0 Purchase of Articles for Analysis, Inspector's Expenses, &c 17 18 1 Examination of Gas 75 0 0 Officers' Guarantee Premiums 18 13 1 Rates, Taxes, Gas, and Water Supply 161 3 10 Stationery, Printing, Postage, and Advertisements 746 8 7 Stamping Contracts 24 10 6 Instalment of Loan fur erection of Offices of the Board 350 0 0 Interest on ditto ditto 211 6 3 Law Expenses 61 12 2 Parliamentary Expenses:— £ s. d. Metropolis Water Supply Bill 100 0 0 London County Council (General Powers) Bill 28 2 10 Copies of Bills, Votes and Proceedings, &c. 23 11 4 151 14 2 Fees to Medioal Practitioners for Certificates under the Public Health (London) Act, 1891* 97 4 0 Office fittings, repairs, &c. 78 16 4 Miscellaneous 130 16 9 £3,833 19 9 *These fees are repaid to the Board by the Metropolitan Asylums Board. 67 MONEY OWING TO BOARD. 1892. March 25th. £ s. d. Overseers of Streatham 1,500 0 0 Mr. W. J. Little 1 19 0 London & South Western Railway Company 49 0 6 Lambeth Water Company 75 15 4 Mitcham Gas Company 3 4 4 South Metropolitan Gas Company 75 18 5 Southwark and Vauxhall Water Company 419 11 5 Wandsworth Gas Company 132 3 6 P. O. Telegraphs 19 12 5 Mr. W. Hampton 30 9 4 „ W. Stanbury 3 6 10 Battersea Vestry 216 4 7 Mr. Beckwith 3 9 7 „ Lavender 3 8 1 London, Chatham & Dover Railway Company 30 0 0 Mr. G. J. Millen 15 19 5 „ Bird 15 9 11 Messrs. Williams, Son & ton 19 2 -6 Mr. Dunn 12 9 5 „ Nichols 4 13 0 „ Miles 2 6 6 „ Leathley 2 6 6 Mrs. Chaundry 4 6 9 Mr. Smith 4 10 5 „ Stonehewer 3 7 4 „ Peacock 3 0 4 „ Micklefield 2 10 6 Wimbledon Common Conservators 23 18 6 Mr. Jones 3 10 0 Croydon Highway Board 18 0 0 Suniry other debtors 4 7 11 £2,704 2 3 MONEY OWING BY BOARD. 1892. March 25th. £ s. d. Atlas Assurance Company (Loans) 10,705 0 0 Customs Fund Office ( ,, ) 8,900 0 0 Clergy Mutual Assurance Society ( „ ) 9,466 13 4 London County Council ( ,, ) 43,667 0 0 School Board for London (Precept) 11,404 14 11 Sundry other Creditors (usual monthly bills, since paid; 10,540 13 10 Dicto—(Private Drains and other works) 155 0 4 £94,834 2 5 68 Receipts and Payments for the March 25th, 1891. £ s. d. £ s. Balance in hands of Clerk 800 0 0 „ „ Bankers 19,149 11 3 19,949 11 3 RECEIPTS. March 25th, 1892. Clapham General Rate 34,018 18 2 ,, Sewers ,, 3,699 8 6 ,, Lighting ,, 3,041 14 6 ,, New Roads Account 2,252 7 8 42,912 8 9 Putney General Rate 18,094 12 10 ,, Sewers ,, 3,224 19 11 ,, Lighting,, 1,816 18 7 ,, New Roads Account596 12 10 23,733 4 2 Streatham General Rate 33,225 4 10 „ Sewers ,, 3,468 10 9 ,, Lighting,, 3,158 10 1 ,, New Roads Account5,543 14 8 45,396 0 4 Tooting General Rate 2,806 11 0 „ Sewers „ 263 9 0 ,, Lighting 541 5 0 ,, New Roads Account 60 19 9 3,672 4 9 Wandsworth General Rate 27,686 5 2 ,, Sewers „ 1,931 12 5 ,, Lighting 3,563 19 11 ,, New Roads Account 2,940 0 9 36,111 18 3 151,825 16 3 London County Council (Loan No. 49) 3,500 0 0 Total Receipts 155,325 16 3 £176,276 7 6 69 Year Ended 25th March, 1892. March 25th, 1892. PAYMENTS. £ s. d. £ s. d. Clapham General Rate 28,877 1 „ Sewers 1,790 4 8 ,, Lighting 2,830 3 1 „ New Roads Account 2,598 10 8 36,096 5 6 Putney General Rate 20,319 18 8 „ Sewers „ 2,442 7 5 „ Lighting 1,893 13 5 ,, New Roads Account 1,175 11 2 25,831 10 Streatham General Rate 30,841 2 8 „ Sewers „ 1,791 5 10 „ Lighting 3,230 7 6 ,, New Roads Account 5,800 18 4 41,663 14 4 Tooting General Rate 2,859 16 4 „ Sewers ,, 173 17 8 ,, Lighting 479 18 4 3,513 12 4 Wandsworth General Rate 25,909 9 0 ,, Sewers ,, 1,180 13 3 ,, Lighting,, 3,456 7 1 „ New Roads Account 2,708 0 4 33,254 9 8 140,359 12 6 Atlas Assurance Company (Loan No. 9) 133 6 8 „ „ ( „ 10) 833 6 8 „ „ ( „ 11) 333 6 8 „ „ ( „ 13) 600 0 0 „ „ ( „ 14) 266 13 4 Customs Fund Office ( „ 16) 1,416 13 4 „ „ ( „ 17) 66 13 4 Clergy Mutual Assurance Soc. ( „ 19) 800 0 0 „ „ ( „ 20) 666 13 4 London County Council ( „ 21) 120 0 0 „ „ ( „ 22) 47 0 0 „ „ ( „25) 50 0 0 „ „ ( „ 26) 100 0 0 „ „ ( „ 27) 100 0 0 „ „ ( „ 29) 52 0 0 „ „ ( „ 30) 34 0 0 „ „ ( „ 31) 350 0 0 „ „ ( „ 33) 49 0 0 „ „ ( „ 34) 35 0 0 „ „ ( „ 35) 25 0 0 „ „ ( „ 37) 333 0 0 „ „ ( „ 38) 600 0 0 „ „ ( „ 41) 166 0 0 „ „ ( „ 42) 350 0 0 „ „ ( „ 43) 147 0 0 „ „ ( „ 44) 1100 0 0 „ „ („ 45) 100 0 0 „ „ ( „ 46) 60 0 0 „ „ ( „ 47) 440 0 0 „ „ ( „ 48) 167 0 0 „ „ ( „ 49) 700 0 0 10,241 13 4 Total Payments 150,601 6 10 Balance in hands of Clerk 519 3 10 „ „ Bankers 24,154 17 10 24,674 1 8 Examined and allowed by us, £175,275 7 6 (Signed) E. C. Pannett, John Page, Auditors. 23rd May, 1892. C. E. Dawson. THE BOARD OF WORKS FOR THE WANDSWORTH DISTRICT. Account in detail, showing the Receipts and Expenditure of the Board for the year ended 25th March, 1892. ACCOUNTS. Balances on 25th March, 1891. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Balances on 25th March, 1892. From Overseers. Contributions towards Sewers. Private Drains. Making up New Roads. Establishment. Other Receipts. Total Receipts. Making up New Roads. Highways. Improvements. Dusting. Watering. Construction of Sewers. Repairing Sewers. Cleansing Sewers. Private Drain and other Works. Lighting Public Lamps. Salaries (exclusive of Establishment Charges). Establishment Charges. School Board Expenses. School Board Election Expense Sundries. Interest on Loans. Total Payments. In Favour. Against Paid by Owners. Paid by Beard. In Favour. Against. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Clapham: General Rate .. 9813 12 6 32361 17 6 .. 17 17 6 .. 92 13 10 1546 9 4 34018 18 2 .. 8888 12 9 10 0 0 2499 9 0 1382 5 5 .. .. .. .. 1293 1 9 .. 981 4 1 715 5 1 12305 2 6 80 16 8 414 8 10 306 17 6 28877 7 1 .. 4672 1 5(1) Sewers Rate .. 11590 12 6 3200 0 0 84 10 0 232 8 0 .. 23 3 5 59 7 0 3599 8 5 .. .. .. .. .. 104 8 0 149 8 9 58 15 9 202 9 5 202 0 2 .. 245 6 1 178 16 3 .. .. 128 6 11 520 13 4 1790 4 8 .. 9781 8 9(2) Lighting Rate 803 1 10 .. 3041 14 6 .. .. .. .. .. 3041 14 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2829 6 6 .. .. .. .. 0 16 7 .. 2830 3 1 1014 13 3 .. New Roads, &c., Account 484 8 3 .. .. .. .. 2252 7 8 .. .. 2252 7 8 2598 10 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2598 10 8 138 5 3 .. 1287 10 1 21404 5 0 38603 12 0 84 10 0 250 5 6 2252 7 8 115 17 3 1605 16 4 42912 8 9 2598 10 8 8888 12 9 10 0 0 2499 9 0 1382 5 5 104 8 0 149 8 9 58 15 9 202 9 5 1495 4 11 2829 6 6 1226 10 8 894 1 4 12305 2 6 80 16 8 543 12 4 827 10 10 36096 5 6 1152 18 6 14453 10 2 Putney: General Rate .. 2224 18 9 17191 17 1 .. 9 3 10 .. 55 0 7 838 11 4 18094 12 10 .. 8013 12 9 21 14 10 514 15 8 645 11 3 .. .. .. .. 258 19 4 .. 774 12 4 424 12 5 7228 3 7 47 19 9 2074 1 8 315 15 1 20319 18 8 .. 4450 4 7(3) Sewers Rate .. 10235 8 3 2986 13 3 10 10 0 214 1 7 .. 13 15 1 .. 3224 19 11 .. .. .. .. .. 3 10 0 1276 5 l 48 19 8 87 15 1 213 18 4 .. 193 13 2 106 3 1 .. .. 33 9 8 476 13 4 2442 7 5 .. 9452 15 9(4) Lighting Rate 598 13 11 .. 1815 6 6 .. .. .. .. 1 12 1 1816 18 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1892 15 8 .. .. .. .. 0 17 9 .. 1893 13 5 521 19 1 .. New Roads, &c., Account 681 6 7 .. .. .. .. 596 12 10 .. .. 596 12 10 1175 11 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1175 11 2 102 8 3 .. 1280 0 6 12460 7 0 21993 16 10 10 10 0 223 5 5 596 12 10 68 15 8 840 3 5 23733 4 2 1175 11 2 8013 12 9 21 14 10 514 15 8 645 11 3 3 10 0 1276 5 l 48 19 8 87 15 1 474 17 8 1892 15 8 968 5 6 530 15 6 7228 3 7 47 19 9 2108 9 1 792 8 5 25831 10 8 624 7 4 13903 0 4 Streatham: General Rate .. 6924 18 0 32175 8 7 .. 39 19 10 .. 111 4 5 898 12 0 33225 4 10 .. 9912 1 7 741 13 5 1186 5 0 1214 2 0 .. .. .. .. 352 5 3 .. 969 3 5 858 4 6 14593 18 4 97 0 1 708 11 1 207 18 0 30841 2 8 .. 4540 15 10(5) Sewers Rate .. 9623 12 2 3058 10 1 35 5 0 336 8 3 .. 27 16 1 10 11 4 3468 10 9 .. .. .. .. .. 50 7 4 50 19 10 66 7 9 327 0 1 301 4 4 .. 242 5 9 214 11 1 .. .. 89 11 6 448 18 2 1791 5 10 .. 7951 7 3(6) Lighting Rate 919 11 4 .. 3158 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. 3158 10 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3230 7 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3230 7 6 847 13 11 .. New Roads, &c., Account 1813 6 4 .. .. .. .. 5543 14 8 .. .. 5543 14 8 5800 18 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5800 18 4 1556 2 8 .. 2732 17 8 16553 10 2 38392 8 9 35 5 0 376 8 1 5543 14 8 139 0 6 909 3 4 45396 0 4 5800 18 4 *9912 1 7 †741 13 5 1186 5 0 1214 2 0 50 7 4 50 19 10 66 7 9 327 0 1 653 9 7 3230 7 6 1211 9 2 1072 15 7 14593 18 4 97 0 1 798 2 7 656 16 2 41663 14 4 2403 16 7 12492 3 l Tooting: General Rate 521 6 0 .. 2781 5 9 .. 1 18 0 .. 9 4 7 14 2 8 2806 11 0 .. 973 2 9 173 19 8 81 0 0 154 11 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 130 16 1 71 4 2 1215 7 5 8 0 11 51 14 1 .. 2859 16 4 468 0 8 .. (7) Sewers Rate .. 411 3 3 196 7 5 15 0 0 49 15 6 .. 2 6 1 .. 263 9 0 .. .. .. .. .. .. 7 15 0 0 12 2 15 5 1 78 13 0 .. 32 13 11 17 16 0 .. .. .. 21 2 6 173 17 8 .. 321 11 11(8) Lighting Rate 206 1 1 .. 541 5 0 .. .. .. .. .. 541 5 0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 479 18 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. 479 18 4 267 7 9 .. New Roads, &c., Account .. 52 10 11 .. .. .. 60 19 9 .. .. 60 19 9 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 8 10 .. 727 7 1 463 14 2 3518 18 2 15 0 0 51 13 6 60 19 9 11 10 8 14 2 8 3672 4 9 .. 973 2 9 ‡173 19 8 81 0 0 154 11 3 .. 7 15 0 0 12 2 15 5 1 78 13 0 479 18 4 163 10 0 89 0 2 1215 7 5 8 0 11 51 14 1 21 2 6 3513 12 4 743 17 3 321 11 11 wandsworth: General Rate .. 12529 1 6 25542 3 3 .. 18 9 6 .. 93 0 8 2032 11 9 27686 5 2 .. 8699 10 3 473 13 1 932 15 0 907 10 8 .. .. .. .. 121 5 9 .. 1022 5 5 717 17 9 11773 19 7 81 2 8 726 16 8 452 12 2 25909 9 0 .. 10752 5 4 (9) Sewers Rate 3983 1 3 1600 0 0 63 19 0 244 8 3 23 5 2 1931 12 5 .. .. .. .. .. 90 9 9 128 1 7 42 0 3 68 17 5 201 13 2 .. 255 11 3 179 9 5 .. .. 1 3 9 213 6 8 1180 13 3 .. 3232 2 1(10) Lighting Rate 1267 1 8 .. 3550 9 11 .. .. .. .. 3 10 0 3553 19 11 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3456 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3456 7 1 1364 14 6 .. New Roads, &c., Account 573 6 8 .. .. .. .. 2940 0 9 .. .. 2940 0 9 2708 0 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2708 0 4 805 7 1 .. 1840 8 4 16512 2 9 30692 13 2 63 19 0 262 17 9 2940 0 9 116 5 10 2036 1 9 36111 18 3 2708 0 4 8699 10 3 §473 13 1 932 15 0 907 10 8 90 9 9 128 1 7 42 0 3 68 17 5 322 18 11 3456 7 1 1277 16 8 897 7 2 11773 19 7 81 2 8 728 0 5 665 18 10 33254 9 8 2170 1 7 13984 4 5 £ 7868 3 8 67393 19 1 133201 8 11 209 4 0 1164 10 3 11393 15 8 451 9 11 5405 7 6 151825 16 3 12283 0 6 36487 0 1 1421 1 0 5214 4 8 4304 0 7 248 15 1 1612 10 3 216 15 7 701 7 1 3025 4 1 11888 15 1 4847 12 0 3483 †† 19 9 47116 11 5 315 0 1 4229 18 6 2963 + + + + 16 9 140359 12 6 7095 1 3 55154 12 11 Loans 3500 0 0 10241 13 4 72733 13 4 Add Loan Fund a/c. 25/3/92. See "C" Add Loan Fund Account 25/3/91 See "A" 79475 6 8 19949 11 3 Repayment of Loans see "B" 150601 5 10 77828 14 7 Deduct Balances against. 55154 12 11 Deduct amount of balances against 87343 10 4 24,674 1 8 Net Balance in Cash 25/3/92. 67393 19 1 Net Balance in Cash 25/3/9 19949 11 3 24674 1 8 £175,275 7 6 £175,275 7 6 ACCOUNT OF LOANS. Balances owing by Board on 25th ' March, 1891. Amounts paid off in year ended 25th March, 1892. Balances owing by Board on 25th March, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. Atlas Assurance Society ( £4,000 Loan, No. 9) (11) 666 13 4 133 6 8 533 6 8 Ditto ditto ( £25,000 „ „ 10) (12) 5000 0 0 833 6 8 4166 13 4 Ditto ditto ( £10,000 „ „ 11) (13) 2000 0 0 333 6 8 1666 13 4 Ditto ditto ( £18,000 „ „ 13) (14) 3600 0 0 600 0 0 3000 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £8,000 ,, ,, 14) (15) 1600 0 0 266 13 4 1333 6 8 Customs Fund Office ( £42,500 „ „ 16) (16) 9916 13 4 1416 13 4 8500 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,000 „ „ 17) (17) 466 13 4 66 13 4 400 0 0 Clergy Mutual Assurance Society ( £24,000 „ „ 19) (18) 5600 0 0 800 0 0 4800 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £20,000 „ „ 20) (19) 5333 6 8 666 13 4 4666 13 4 London County Council ( £3,600 „ „ 21) (20) 1800 0 0 120 0 0 1680 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £1,400 „ „ 22) (21) 742 0 0 47 0 0 695 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £1,500 „ „ 25) (22) 1000 0 0 50 0 0 950 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £3,000 „ „ 26) (23) 2000 0 0 100 0 0 1900 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £1,000 „ „ 27) (24) 100 0 0 100 0 0 .. Ditto ditto { £3,000 „ ,, 29) (25) 2584 0 0 52 0 0 2532 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £1,000 „ „ 30) (26) 762 0 0 34 0 0 728 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £7,000 „ „ 31) (27) 4550 0 0 350 0 0 4200 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,800 „ „ 33) (28) 2450 0 0 49 0 0 2401 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £700 „ „ 34) (29) 490 0 0 35 0 0 455 0 6 Ditto ditto ( £750 „ „ 35) (30) 600 0 0 25 0 0 575 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,000 ,, „ 37) (31) 666 0 0 333 0 0 333 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £3,000 „ „ 38) (32) 1200 0 0 600 0 0 600 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,500 „ „ 41) (33) 2002 0 0 166 0 0 1836 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £7,000 „ „ 42) (34) 6300 0 0 350 0 0 5950 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £4,400 „ „ 43) (35) 4106 0 0 147 0 0 3959 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £5,500 „ „ 44) (36) 4400 0 0 1100 0 0 3300 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,000 „ „ 45) (37) 1900 0 0 100 0 0 1800 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £3,000 „ „ 46) (38) 2940 0 0 60 0 0 2880 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,200 „ „ 47) (39) 2200 0 0 440 0 0 1760 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £2,500 „ „ 48) (40) 2500 0 0 167 0 0 2333 0 0 Ditto ditto ( £3,500 „ „ 49) (41) .. 700 0 0 2800 0 0 TOTALS £216,850 79475 6 8 10241 13 4 72733 13 4 "a" "B" "C" (1) The amount of loan as against this balance is £9,270 7s. 3d. (2) The amount of loan as against this balance is £10,237 0s.. 2d. (3) The amount of loan as against this balance is £10,228 5s. 11d. (4) The amount of loan as against this balance is £9,748 9s. 3d. (5) The amonnt of loan as against this balance is £6,554 15s. 2d. (6) The amount of loan as against this balance is £8,873 13s. 9d. (7) The amount of loan in addition to this balance is £119 12s. 3d. (8) The amount of loan as against this balance is £429 18s. 0d. (9) The amount of loan as against this balance is £13,453 19s. 6d. (10) The amount of loan as against this balance is £3,817 l1s 7d. (11)This loan was negociated in November, 1865, at 5 per cent. interdxzst, to defray expenses of sconstructing new Sewers in Wandsworth, upon the security of the Sewers Rates in Wandsworth, to be repaid by 30 equal anuual instalments; £3,466 13s. 4d. has been paid off. (12) This loan was negociated in May, 1866, at 5 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in putney. upon security of the Sewers Rates in Clapham, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £20,833 6s.8d. has been paid off. (13) This loan was negociated in May, 1866, at 5 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in putney. upon security of the Sewers Rates in Putney, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £8,833 6s.8d. has been paid off. (14) This loan was negociated in December, 1866, at 5 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Wandsworth., upon security of the Sewers Rates in Wandsworth, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £15,000 has been paid off. (15) This loan was negociated in December, 1866, at 5 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in putney, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Putney, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £6,666 13s.4d. has been paid off. (16) This loan was negociated in May, 1867, at 4 7/8 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Streamtham, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Streamtham, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £34,00 has been paid off. (17)This loan was negociated in May, 1867, at 4 7/8 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Tooting, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Tooting, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £16,00 has been paid off. (18)This loan was negociated in May, 1867, at 4½ per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Clapham, upon security of the Sewers Rates in clapham, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £19,200 has been paid off. (19)This loan was negociated in May, 1868, at 4½ per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing new Sewers in Putney, upon security of the Sewers Rates in Putney, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £15,333 6s. 8d. has been paid off. (20)This loan was negociated in May, 1876, at £3 18s. 6d. per cent. interest, for the purchase of Frogmore Wharf, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalmetns. £1,920 has been paid off. (21)This loan was obtained in December , 1876, at 3¾ per cent. interest, to complete the purchase of Frogmore Wharf, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalmetns. £705 has been paid off. (22)This loan was obtained in December , 1880, at 4 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing a new Sewer in Atkins Road, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £550 has been paid off. (23)This loan was obtained in March , 1881, at 4 per cent. interest, to defray expenses of constructing a new Sewer at Roehampton, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 equal annual instalmetns. £1,100 has been paid off. (24)This loan was obtained in June , 1882, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of laying York Paving in High Street, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 10 annual instalmetns. This loan has now been paid off. * Including the sum of £1,437 10s. 2d. for wood-paving in Balham High Road, Streatham Hill, and Brixton Hill. † Including the sum of £521 18s. l0d. for widening Balham Road and expenses incidental thereto, in connection with the extension of the tramways from the Wheatsheaf public house to Totterdown. ‡ This sum was expended for widening Balham Road and expenses incidental thereto, in connection with the extension of the tramways from the Wheatsheaf public house to Totterdown. § Including the sum of £426 11s. 5d. on account of widening the public way in High Street and South Street. || Including the sum of £1,657 1s. 3d. on account of construction of dock, wharf, and bridge at the mouth of the Beverley Brook. †† Including the sum of £211 6s. 3d. for interest on loan raised for purchase of land and erection of new offices. ‡‡ Exclusive of the sum of £211 6s. 3d. interest on offices loan, included in Establishment charges. (25) This loan was obtained in December, 1883, at £3 10s. per cent interest, to defray expenses of widening Wandsworth Lane (Putney Bridge Road), at its junction with High Street, Putney, upon security of the Rates in the District, to bo repaid by 58 annual instalments ; £468 has been paid off. (26) This loan was obtained in December, 1883, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of widening High Street and Red Lion Street, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments ; £272 has been paid off. (27) This loan was obtained in December, 1883, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Paving Works in Wandsworth Road and High Street, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 annual instalments ; £2,800 has been .paid off. (28) This loan was obtained in July, 1884, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, for the purchase of the Parish Yard, Wandsworth Road, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the trict, to be repaid by 57 annual instalments; £399 has been paid off. (29) This loan was obtained in July, 1884, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of erecting buildings in the Parish Yard, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 annual instalments ; £245 has been paid off. (30) This loan was obtained in March, 1885, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray contribution (one moiety) towards cost of widening London & South Western Railway Bridge over Garratt Lane, Wandsworth, upon security of the Hates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments ; £175 has been paid off. (31) This loan was obtained in July, 1886, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving Works in High Street and Clapham Park Road, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 6 annual instalments ; £1,667 has been paid off. (32) This loan was obtained in August, 1887, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of wood and tar-paving works in The Pavement, Clapham Common, Cedars Road, Grafton Square, Albion Road, Cavendish Road, and Howard Street, Clapham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by five equal annual instalments ; £2,400 has been paid off. (33) This loan was obtained in March, 1888, at £3 10s. per cent. interest, to defray expenses of embanking the towing path of the River Thames at Putney, and constructing a footway and oarriage road thereon upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 15 annual instalments; £664 has been paid off. (34) This loan was obtained in May, 1888, at £3 10s. per cent interest, to defray cost of purchase of land and erection of new offices for the Board, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 equal annual instalments ; £1,050 has bean paid off. (35) This loan was obtained in July, 1888, to defray contribution (one moiety) towards cost of widening London & South Western Railway Bridges over North Street, Birdhurst Road, Wandsworth Lane, Putney Bridge Road, Point Pleasant, and York Road, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 30 annual instalments ; £441 has been paid off. (36) This loan was obtained in August, 1889, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of laying Wood Paving in Balham High Road, Streatham, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 5 equal annual instalments ; £2,200 has been paid off. (37) This loan was obtained in October, 1889, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of widening High Street and South Street, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 20 equal annual instalments ; £200 has been paid off. (38) This loan was obtained in April, 1890, at £3 10s. per cent interest, for the purchase of a wharf at Bell Lane, Wandsworth, upon security of the Rates in the District, to be repaid by 50 equal annual instalments; £120 has been paid off. (39) This loan was obtained in November, 1890, at £3 10s. per cent interest, to defray expenses of laying Wood Paving in Balham High Road, Streatham, upon security of the Rates in the District; to be repaid by five equal annual instalments; £440 has been paid off. '40) This loan was obtained in December, 1890, at £3 10s. per cent interest, to defray expenses of constructing a dock, wharf, and bridge at the mouth of the Beverley Brook, Putney, upon security of the Rates in the District; to be repaid by 15 annual instalments; £167 has been paid off. (41) This loan was obtained in June 1891, at £3 10s. per cent, interest, to defray expenses of Wood Paving works in High Street, Putney, upon security of the Rates in the District; to be repaid by 5 equal annual instalments ; £700 has been paid off. ACCOUNT OF LOANS, SHOWING AMOUNT OWING, &c., BY EACH PARISH. PARISH. Amounts owing 25th March, 1891. Amounts paid off in year ended 25th March, 1892. Amounts owing 25th March, 1892. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. CLAPHAM 21056 0 0 3150 6 8 17905 13 4 PUTNEY 18019 6 8 2451 13 4 19067 13 4 STREATHAM 16516 13 4 2956 13 4 13560 0 0 TOOTING 466 13 4 66 13 4 400 0 0 WANDSWORTH 17116 13 4 1266 6 8 15850 6 8 DISTRICT (Offices Loan) 6300 0 0 350 0 0 5950 0 0 Totals. 79475 6 8 10241 13 4 72733 13 4 SANITARY DEPARTMENT. REPORT ON THE HEALTH and SANITARY CONDITION of the several parishes comprised in the WANDSWORTH DISTRICT, DURING THE YEAR 1891, BY THE MEDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH: together with THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ANALYST. 73 To the Board of Works for the Wandsworth District. Gentlemen, We have the honour to present our Annual Report on the health, sanitary condition, and vital statistics of the Wandsworth District for the year 1891. We have adhered to the plan followed in former Reports as to the general arrangement. We are pleased to be able to point out that in spite of conditions, such as the Influenza epidemic, tending to raise the mortality and increase the amount of sickness; the statistics and statements that follow show that the District has maintained during the year a most satisfactory state of healthiness, which compesar very favourably with previous years. We have the honour to remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient Servants, The Medical Officers of Health for the Wandsworth District. 75 REPORT ON THE HEALTH AND SANITARY CONDITION OF THE ENTIRE DISTRICT, 1891. VITAL STATISTICS. Population. The census enumeration taken in April, 1891, is used as the population from which the various rates are calculated in this Report. The enumeration gave 156,931. The population in 1881 was 103,172, so that the increase in the ten years has been 53,759, or 52 per cent. The increase in the decade from 1871 to 1881 was 32,128 or 45 per cent., so that a considerably higher rate of increase has been maintained in the last decade. Births. The total number registered was 4,477, of which 2,301 were of males and 2,176 of females. 76 The following Table gives the numbers in each subdistrict with the birth-rate, rates of natural increase, and totals for whole district. TABLE I. BIRTHS. RATES Sub-Districts. Males. Females. Total. Birth-rate Rate of Natural Increase. Clapham 609 535 1144 26.2 12.57 Putney 238 241 479 26.9 15.0 Streatham 553 531 1084 25.2 13.6 Tooting 87 86 173 29.08 12.98 Wandsworth 814 783 1597 35.48 21.0 Whole District 2301 2176 4477 28.52 15.42 The birth-rate was therefore 28.52 per thousand, compared with 27.01 in 1890. The mean birth-rate for the last ten years was 29.0, so that the rate is still below the average. The birth-rate for the whole of London was 31.8. The excess of births over deaths was 2424, and the rate of natural increase was 15.42. Deaths. The total number of deaths that occurred, excluding deaths in institutions, the inhabitants of which are from outside the district was 2,053, of which 1,008 were of males and 1,045 of females. 77 The following Table gives the distribution in the subdistricts: — TABLE II. DEATHS. Death-rate. Sub-Districts. Males. Females. Total. Clapham 273 323 596 13.63 Putney 103 110 213 11.9 Streatham 256 243 499 11.6* Tooting 51 42 93 16.1 Wandsworth 325 327 652 14.48* Whole District 1008 1045 2053 13.1* * Excluding deaths and population in public institutions. The death-rate was therefore 13.1, compared with 14.58 in 1890. 78 The following Table gives a comparison with the preceding ten years:— Birth-rates, Death-rates, and rates of Natural Increase in the entire district during the ten years 1881—90 inclusive. Years. Birth-rate per 1000. Death-rate per 1000. Rate of Natural Increase. 1881 30.0 14.0 16.0 1882 30.4 15.5 15.3 1883 30.4 16.5 13.9 1884 32.3 15.3 17.0 1885 30.0 13.0 17.0 1886 30.8 14.5 16.3 1887 30.4 13.3 17.1 1888 29.5 13.4 16.1 1889 27.5 11.6 15.8 1890 27.01 14.58 12.43 Mean of Ten Years. 29.8 14.15 15.6 1891 28.52 13.1 15.42 The death-rate has undergone a decided fall since the previous year and is below the decennial average, which was 1415. The death-rate for the whole of London was 21.4 in 1891, so that the Wandsworth district continues to show a rate very much below the Metropolitan one. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. To the above deaths are to be added those that occur in various Metropolitan Institutions that are made use use of by inhabitants of this district. Those Institutions include the Union Infirmary, the various general and special Hospitals, and those of the Asylums' Board. 79 The following Table gives particulars of the causes of these deaths, and the character of the Institution in which they occurred, and the sub-district from which they came:— TABLE IV. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. CAUSES OF DEATH. Number in Entire District. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. Union Infirmary. General and Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 2 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. 3 Diphtheria 8 .. 1 2 .. 5 .. 3 5 Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases 10 2 3 .. .. 5 6 2 2 Tubercular Diseases 46 9 9 4 .. 24 19 25 2 Cancer 29 8 1 6 1 13 16 12 1 Rheumatism 3 2 0 1 .. .. 3 .. .. Respiratory Diseases 65 17 7 5 4 32 41 23 1 Circulatory Diseases 40 14 5 3 1 17 22 16 1 Nervous Diseases 59 14 8 5 .. 32 27 17 15 Other Diseases 76 22 12 8 2 32 49 26 1 Violence 18 8 2 4 .. 4 6 10 .. Total 357 97 48 38 8 166 190 134 31 Corresponding Totals in preceding year 359 91 43 61 11 153 177 138 44 The total of these deaths was therefore 357, compared with 359 in 1890. If we add these to the 2,053 (as given in Table II.) we obtain a total of 2,410 deaths, giving a death-rate of 15.3 compared with 16.9 last year. This of course includes the deaths of persons not properly belonging to the Wandsworth District who have happened to die within it, as well as all the deaths of the inhabitants whenever they have occurred. 80 It will be seen from this Table that for every 1,000 living there died in the Outlying Institutions:— 1890. 1891 Clapham 2.1 2.2 Putney 2-4 2.7 Streatham 1.4 0.8 Tooting 1.9 1.3 Wandsworth 3.5 3.5 The next Table gives interesting information as to the density of population, and the relative mortality of the industrial and other classes in each sub-district:— TABLE V. Sub-District. Population Census, 1891. Percentage of Total Population. Number of persons to 1 acre. Relative mortality of Industrial and other classes. Industrial classes. Other classes. Clapham 43,698 27.8 35 61.8 38.2 Putney 17,771 11.3 8 57.8 42.2 Streatham 42,958 27.4 14 45.7 54.3 Tooting 5,784 3.7 10 45.1 54.9 Wandsworth 46,720 29.8 19 63.4 34.6 In Table VI. the deaths occurring in the entire district during the year are classified according to sex, age, and social position, the relative numbers in each district being also given. TABLE VI. Summary of Deaths and their Causes, registered in the entire District during 1891, classified according to Sex, Age, and Social Position, and showing also the relative numbers in each Sub-District. POPULATION of entire District, (Census) 1891, 156,931. Total Deaths from each class of Disease in the entire District. Sub-Districts. Sex. Age. Social Position Clapham—Population, 43,698. Area in acres, 1,233. Putney—Population, 17,771, Area in acres. 2,176. Streatham — Population, 42,453, Area in acres, 2,904. Tooting—Population, 5,784. Area in acres, 561. Wands worth—Population. 46,720, Area in acres, 2,433. Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 10 years. From 10 to 20 years. From 20 to 40 years. From 40 to 60 years. From 60 to 80 years. 80 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle & Trading Class. Industrial and Labouring Classes. Area in Statute Acres, 9,352. CAUSES OF DEATH I. Zymotic. Influenza 61 22 .. 21 3 15 23 38 3 6 2 .. 8 10 28 4 4 9 22 26 Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 75 20 8 19 10 18 40 35 27 45 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 31 43 Measles 78 32 .. 36 .. 10 422 36 17 52 8 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 11 66 Scarlatina 5 1 1 1 .. 2 3 2 .. 1 .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 3 Diphtheria 22 2 .. 1 .. 19 8 14 2 12 7 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 3 19 Continued Fever 2 .. .. .. .. 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 Enteric Fever 10 4 1 2 .. 3 5 5 .. .. .. 3 5 2 .. .. .. .. 4 6 Diarrhœa, Dysentery & Cholera. 51 12 4 10 .. 25 26 25 35 8 1 .. .. 2 3 2 .. .. 8 43 Erysipelas 6 2 .. 4 .. .. 3 3 .. .. .. .. 1 3 2 .. .. .. 4 2 Puerperal Fever 6 1 1 1 1 2 .. 6 .. .. .. 2 4 .. .. .. .. .. 2 4 Other Zymotic Diseases 8 .. 7 .. .. 1 4 4 1 1 .. .. 1 1 3 1 .. .. 3 5 Totals of Zymotic Class 324 96 22 95 14 97 155 169 85 125 21 8 23 19 36 7 4 13 89 218 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 16 7 .. 1 3 5 8 8 .. .. 2 1 1 4 8 .. 1 1 4 10 Cancer and other Tumours 103 32 9 32 3 27 25 78 .. .. .. 1 7 44 43 8 8 11 40 44 Other Constitutional Diseases 21 3 1 5 7 5 12 9 10 3 1 2 .. 2 3 .. .. 1 7 13 Tubercular Phthisis 183 43 23 29 5 83 98 85 8 6 5 17 66 64 17 .. 6 12 60 105 Tabes Mesa 22 6 .. 4 1 11 14 8 10 7 2 2 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 6 16 Hydrocephalus 34 17 .. 11 .. 6 22 12 15 11 6 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 10 22 Scrofula 7 5 1 .. .. 1 7 .. .. 1 .. 3 1 2 .. .. .. .. 3 4 III. Local. Nervous 287 74 23 77 9 104 153 134 55 35 4 8 24 60 87 14 8 35 91 153 Circulatory 180 59 22 46 14 39 85 95 1 2 2 10 26 58 74 7 13 22 61 84 Respiratory 510 125 43 127 14 201 255 255 102 93 5 5 34 75 155 41 13 37 157 303 Digestive 149 32 26 36 4 51 69 80 46 8 4 9 15 23 38 6 4 24 53 68 Urinary 55 12 8 13 .. 22 37 18 2 1 .. 2 10 10 28 2 3 6 22 24 Generative 12 1 1 .. 1 9 .. 12 .. .. .. .. 8 4 .. .. 2 3 4 3 Locomotory 4 .. .. 2 .. 2 2 2 .. 1 1 .. .. 2 .. .. .. 2 .. 2 Integumentary 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth, Low 156 48 10 40 5 53 87 69 155 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 14 39 102 Vitality Congenital Defects 14 .. .. 1 .. 13 8 6 13 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 9 Old Age 95 20 10 29 9 27 41 54 .. .. .. .. .. .. 36 59 10 12 23 50 V. Violence 54 15 9 5 1 24 42 12 12 5 3 6 7 13 7 1 1 2 7 44 VI. Illdefined & 9 .. 5 1 3 .. 6 3 7 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 7 Not specified 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Totals 2237 596 213 555 93 780 1128 1109 522 301 56 76 222 380 535 145 74 197 684 1282 82 In this Table, it is to be noted, are included deaths occurring in various Institutions in Streatham and Wandsworth, such as the St. Anne's Home, Hospital for Incurables, St. Peter's Hospital, and the Middlesex County Lunatic Asylum, which receive patients from all parts of London, and not from this district. Ages at Death. Of the total deaths 23.3 per cent. were of infants under 1 year of age, and 30.3 percent. were of persons over 60 years of age. Infantile Death-rate. The number of deaths of infants under 1 year, per thousand births, is represented by the following figures for each sub-district:- Clapham 128 per 1,000 Putney 98 ,, Streatham 108 ,, Tooting 121 „ Wandsworth 119 „ Whole District 116 „ The corresponding rate for 1890 was 144, and the rate for the whole of London was 154 per thousand. Causes of Death. Table VII. gives a comparison between the number of deaths in 1891 and the preceding years. S3 TABLE VII. 1887. 1888. 1889. 1890. 1891 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. 2 ZYMOTIC. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. Measles 68 53 31 87 78 Scarlatina 12 14 5 2 5 Diphtheria 20 53 30 15 22 Whooping Cough 41 96 39 95 75 Typhus Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. Enteric Fever 10 13 9 14 10 Diarrhœa, Dysentry and Cholera 70 64 41 73 51 Erysipelas 11 5 5 5 6 Puerperal Fever 2 6 3 8 6 Influenza .. .. .. 21 61 Other Zymotic Diseases 5 .. 5 2 8 Totals of Zymotic Class 240 304 169 322 324 Gout and Rheumatism 26 18 14 33 16 Cancer and other Tumours 78 70 68 89 103 Other Constitutional Diseases 18 12 15 38 21 Tubercular 268 257 219 265 246 Nervous 292 298 282 294 287 Circulatory 142 160 146 150 180 Respiratory 330 357 302 473 510 Digestive 119 119 107 123 149 Urinary 52 50 50 50 55 Generative 4 7 14 18 12 Locomotory 1 .. 3 3 4 Integumentary 1 4 .. 1 1 Premature Births, Low Vitality, Malforamation, &c., &c. 144 156 149 174 170 Old Age 97 96 103 104 95 Violence 39 48 48 66 54 Ill-defined and not specified 4 8 9 10 10 Totals 1855 1964 1698 2213 2237 Zymotic Diseases. There were 324 deaths from diseases of this class, or 14.4 per cent. of the total deaths, giving a death-rate of 2.06 per thousand of the population. 84 The next Table shows the rate for the last 4 years:— TABLE VIII. 1888 1889 1890 1891 Clapham 1.9 1.4 1.5 2.19 Putney 1.0 .73 1.1 1.23 Streatham 1.7 .8 1.8 2.21 Tooting 2.4 1.7 2.43 Wandsworth 3.7 1.3 3.3 2.07 Whole District 2.1 1.1 2.1 2.06 From this it is seen that the rate is lower than last year's, or than that of 1888. On turning to Table VII. we see that the total of Zymotic deaths has increased slightly. The most striking difference from previous years, however, is seen to be the occurrence of 61 deaths attributed to Influenza, as compared with 21 in 1890, and none in previous years. This makes up a considerable part of the total 324, and omitting these deaths the Zymoticrate would be 1.6. Very numerous reports have been written on the Influenza Epidemics that we have had to face during the last three years so that but little remains to be added. Our knowledge of the disease cannot yet be said to be complete, but there seems little doubt of its truly infectious nature, and it is, therefore, here included in the Zymotic class. The memorandum issued by the Local Government Board during the third epidemic, which commenced at the end of last year, 85 gave what general advice was possible as to its prevention. The measures to be adopted are the isolation of recognised cases for a sufficiently long period; the avoidance of the aggregation of large numbers of people, as at meetings and concerts, and particularly so with regard to those who are in feeble health, or have any weakness of the respiratory organs; and lastly, complete rest in bed, for the sake of the patient, where the illness has unmistakably developed. Fatal results have almost always been due to pulmonary complications, particularly pneumonia, which undoubtedly is liable to come on in a ccrtain proportion of the attacks, especially in persons of feeble constitutional strength. With regard to the action to be taken by the Sanitary Authorities, we are decidedly of opinion that no benefit commensurate at all with the expenditure both of money and labour that would be required, would result from adding it to the schedule of infectious diseases in which notification is required, and by attempting to apply the same preventive measures as for scarlet fever. The number notified in a single day during an epidemic would be enormous, and probably not a tithe of them would be recognised and notified early enough to be of any use. It is to be hoped we shall again have a long period of freedom from this capricious disease, which has in former times remained absent for many years after a short series of annual epidemics. Small-pox has again not been the cause of a single death. There were 4 modified cases notified, however. Scarlet Fever caused only 5 deaths, to which should be added 2 that took place in the Asylums Board Hospitals. The number of deaths in 1890 was 2. The number of notifications received during the year was 453. The case mortality was therefore l.5 per cent., showing that a mild type of disease prevailed. 86 Diphtheria resulted in 22 deaths, as compared with 15 in the preceding year, and 30 and 53 in 1889 and 1888 respectively. Other 8 deaths must be added for outside Institutions. The number of cases reported, including 8 of Membraneous Croup, was 182. The case mortality was 17.4 per cent. Enteric Fever caused 10 deaths, as compared with 14 in 1890. The intimations numbered 64. The case mortality was 15.6 per cent. Diarrhœa, &c., resulted in 51 deaths, as compared with 73 in the previous year. This is a satisfactorily low figure. Measles and Whooping Cough again largely swell the Zymotic death-roll, as they numbered 78 and 75 respectively, or very nearly half the total deaths. Both figures are lower than in 1890, when they were 87 and 95 respectively. The subject of the prevention of these eminently "preventible" diseases will be returned to further on. Puerperal Fever is accredited with 6 deaths. Only 10 cases of illness were notified, showing that a very large proportion end fatally. Mortality from other Diseases. The clases of diseases in which an increase is noticed are Cancers and other Tumours, Respiratory diseases, and Circulatory diseases. With regard to Cancers this appears to be the case in London generally, where there was last year an excess of 412 over the decennial average, and the increase has been noted for several years, and appears to be progressive. 87 The excess of deaths from Respiratory diseases and to a less extent from Circulatory diseases must be attributed to more temporary causes, namely, the Influenza epidemic, as shown by the fact that the great excess of deaths from these causes occurred in May and June, when Influenza was prevalent, at a time when the atmospheric conditions, usually associated with fatal chest diseases, were absent. Notification of Infectious Diseases. We again express our satisfaction with the working of the Infectious Diseases Notification Act. It has been the means, in many instances, of giving us most valuable information of the existence of infectious illness, and the small number of deaths as compared with former years shows that the means adopted have been crowned with considerable success. We have in former reports, as in this, drawn attention to the high mortality that occurs year after year from Measles and have expressed our opinion strongly that such a state of matters should not be allowed to continue, without some effort being made to prevent it. We presented a Report in June to your Sanitary Committee on the subject of the benefit likely to be obtained by adding Measles to the list of diseases which must be notified. Sub-joined is the Report REPORT OF MEDICAL OFFICERS OF HEALTH re NOTIFICATION OF MEASLES. To the Sanitary Committee. We beg to report that in accordance with the resolution passed at the last Sanitary Committee, we have had under our consideration the question of the advisability of adding measles to the list of infectious diseases under the Notification Act. This enactment has been in operation over a year, and we have now considerable experience of its working and of the benefits derived from it. We have found it to be of great advantage in enabling us to take measures to check tho spread of those diseases to which it applies. B 88 The question arises now whether the Act would be equally effective in the case of measles. On account of the peculiarities attending the course of this disease, especially its very great infectiousness during the preliminary stages, when the children are still attending school, we are unanimously of the opinion that we could never control epidemics of this disorder to the same extent as in the case of the other diseases under the Act. But although we could not expect as much benefit from its notification as in these other cases, it would undoubtedly enable us to control and limit the dissemination of the disease to a certain extent. We would then be in a better position to prevent children from infected houses attending school, who would otherwise become in their turn centres for spreading the contagion. It would also assist us to have isolation and disinfection carried out much more efficiently than can be done at the present time. This would, doubtless, especially in the presence of an epidemic, involve a large amount of additional work and expense, and probably an addition to the sanitary staff. In considering the question whether the benefit obtained would be commensurate with the additional labour and expense, we desire to point out that there is a mortality attending this disease much greater than that from scarlet fever. In our Annual Eeport for 1888 we drew attention to this grave fact in connection with the incidence of measles, and the same thing is borne out by the Registrar General's last Annual Eeport. During the year 3,291 deaths occurred from measles and only 784 from scarlet fever. From these figures we infer that there must have bean during these twelve months wide spread epidemics of measles throughout the Metropolis, as it is a matter of common experience, that comparing case with case, measles is not attended with such serious results as follow scarlet fever. This great mortality is a matter therefore for serious consideration, and is to be regretted the more as it is the direct result to a very large extent of carelessness and want of medical supervision. In comparing the mortality of these two diseases during the last ten years, it is very remarkable to notice the diminution attending that of scarlet fever and the increase in that from measles. This diminution in the former has coincided in point of time with the greater number of admissions into the Asylums Board Hospitals. In other words, as isolation has been carried out more effectively the number of deaths has rapidly diminished. "We have good reason to believe that a similar result would follow if isolation could be carried out in the case of measles, and we are of the opinion that such could be done to a much larger extent than obtains at the present time if each fresh case were at once notified to the Medical Officer of Health. B 2 89 Another advantage undoubtedly gained by the Act would be to mpress the public mind generally with the serious nature of the disease and the necessity for greater care and isolation. For these reasons we are of the opinion that it would be to the public advantage to include measles in the list of diseases under the Notification Act. 9th May, 1891. We beg to submit the answers we have received from the several Medical Officers of Health of towns in which the notification of measles has been adopted, in reply to questions referring to the above subject. 90 It will be seen from the general tenor of the replies that they furnish corroboration of the views we have had the honour of expressing in our report of the 9th May, 1891. June 10 th, 1891. Name of Authority. Under what circumstances was the notification of Measles adopted in your District,—whether on general grounds or in consequence of an epidemic. Have you any means of isolation? has been your experience of such adoption? COLCHESTER Being the only means of opposing its invasion and spread. Yes, an infectious hospital. Satisfactory. Epidemics not so severe and chance of being nipped in the bud. CROYDON UNION. On general grounds Yes, a hospital for infectious diseases provided by the Guardians in the Workhouse grounds. Medical Officer has not yet formed any opinion. DARLINGTON Advice of two Medical Councillors. No. No use in checking disease. Authority will probably try to get rid of disease from list to be notified. DEVIZES On general grounds. Borough Hospital for infectious diseases. The Council included measles in the list of diseases to be notified upon the recommendation of the Wilts County Council. This came into operation at the beginning of this year. A case of measles was brought to this town from Bristol. The case was immediately isolated at the hospital, but the patient had been teaching at a Sunday School the day previously. Twelve days after three children who were in his class at the Sunday School sickened. In the meantime they had attended another day school. The children at the day school one after another sickened and very soon we had the whole town affected. Altogether I have had between 700 and 800 cases reported. I should say the hospital was used for the earliest cases. At the present time my opinion is that the adoption has not proved of any service in the case of measles. KIDDERMINSTER. On general grounds and advice of Medical Officer after Committee had had a meeting of all medical men of the town. No. Not the means of preventing spread of disease,— gave more control over it and in the opinion of the Medical Officer the means of saving many lives. 91 KINGTON On general grounds. No, except for pauper cases in the infectious ward of the Workhouse. No cases since the adoption of the Act. LINCOLN Measles added when Act adopted, January, 1890. No. Raised the expenses under the Act two-thirds; 400 cases last year, one death—possibly publicity given as to penalties may have caused parents to have more care in exposing children. MALVERN On general grounds. None at present. Hospital for infectious cases proposed. No epidemic since introduction of notification. No experience of its working. MANSFIELD Proposed by members of the Commissioners and carried against opinion of Medical Officers. Yes, a small cottage for scarlet fever. Useful in one respect. On visiting supposed cases of measles Medical Officer found them to be scarlet fever. In case of epidemic it would be useful. Commissioners grumble at cost. MEXBOROUGH Strong personal recommendation of Medical Officer on general grounds and in consequence of a fatal epidemic. No. Expect much benefit, but as yet had little experience. PONTEFRACT Both grounds. Reliable data found necessary before closing schools. Cases of scarlet fever not reported on ground that parents thought it measles. No, do not advocate strict isolation in measles. If people think Act won't be enforced they will not report measles. If adopted handbills must be sent to each house. RICHMOND (Yorks). Recommendation of Medical Officer None at present, in contemplation. Satisfactory. ST. NEOT'S On general grounds. No. Great service in obtaining earliest information and closing schools. SHERBORNE On general grounds. Not for town generally. Infectious ward in sanatorium belonging to King's School, & infectious wards belonging to Union House. Afforded opportunity of repressing spread of epidemic through the public schools. STAMFORD Advice of Medical Officer. Yes. The Stamford Infirmary infectious wards are open to the district on payment. Able to check infection by keeping children from infected houses from attending school. UPPINGHAM On general grounds. No. Useless without means of isolation. WELLS (Somerset) On general grounds. A small hospital with two wards, capable of admitting 8 patients. Notification not of much benefit (if any). WIDNES In consequence of an epidemic in the Spring of 1890. Yes. Infectious Diseases Hospital. The epidemic declined. 92 Your Committee decided to recommend the Board to take the necessary steps to have measles added, but we much regret that the matter has for the present fallen through. It may be added in reference to the replies from Medical Officers of Health printed above, that it seems that in most of the towns where the notification has been adopted, it has been done so recently that there has not been sufficient time to form perfectly reliable judgments. Measles tends to recur in periodic epidemics, and we think that 5 years would not be too long a time for a trial of the effect of notification, so as to include two epidemic periods. There is no doubt that to get the full benefit of a system of notification means of isolation ought to be available, and, of course, at present there is no such means in the Metropolis. The following gives particulars of the number of notifications received from each sub-district:— TABLE IX. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. Total. Small Pox (modified) .. .. .. .. 4 4 Diphtheria 23 12 40 .. 89 164 Membraneous Croup 2 .. .. .. 6 8 Scarlet Fever 110 54 105 7 177 453 Enteric Fever 20 3 14 .. 27 64 Continued Fever .. .. .. .. 2 2 Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. 1 1 Puerperal Fever 3 2 .. 1 4 10 Erysipelas 50 8 26 3 90 177 Totals 208 79 185 11 400 883 An outline of the routine method adopted in the prevention of infectious disease is here given. 93 As soon as possible, on receipt of a notification, an inspector visits the house and ascertains whether the patient has been removed to hospital, and at the same time acquires information as to the school attended (if a child) or the place of business (if any) at which the patient has been working, the source of the milk supply, or any particulars known as to contact with any previous case and also as to the means of isolation, if the friends do not wish the patient to be sent to hospital. He also leaves a notice containing the provisions of the law as to the exposure of infected persons or things, the casting of infectious articles into the dust-bins, &c., &c. A notice is then sent to the head teachers of the schools attended by any children residing in the infected house, cautioning them not to admit any children until they have been informed that the house is free from infection. A notice has been sent also to the superintendent of visitors for the district as required by the Board's order. The information is reported to the Medical Officer of Health, and if the means of isolation are deemed to be insufficient from the nature of the habitation, pressure is brought to bear to obtain consent for the patient's removal to the isolation hospital. In no instance in the past year has it been necsssary to take legal proceedings to compel removal, persuasion have been sufficient in all instances. It may be pointed out here that the removal of a patient to hospital is very easily effected under the present regulations of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. An application from anyone (not even necessarily a medical man) stating particulars as to name, age, sex, disease, and full postal address, will be attended to provided a medical certificate is left at the house stating the disease from which the patient suffers, and that he is fit for removal to hospital. This certificate must be handed to 94 the nurse who arrives in the ambulance, in response to a telegram. It is not necessary that the ambulance should be sent for by the Sanitary Officials as appears to be thought by many persons. This is important, as in some instances on Sundays delay has been caused, the sanitary office being closed. Books of ready printed forms have, on our recommendation, been sent to every registered medical practitioner residing in the district. After removal of the patient to the hospital, or after recovery, the premises and articles contained therein are thoroughly disinfected under the supervision of our department. First, every aperture of the windows and fire-place and all doors, except one by which the room is to be left, are closed by pasting strips of paper over them and then sulphur is set alight to, provision being made by means of a special apparatus, to prevent anything in the room being burnt. Then the door of the room is closed and pasted up from the outside, and the room left for 12 hours, all infected articles having being spread about the room. On opening the room next day it is found smelling strongly, and the walls and furniture are coated with powdered sulphur. The disinfecting process has depended on the saturation of the air of the room with sulphurous acid produced by the burning sulphur, which penetrates into every crack and crevice, and also on the sulphur itself, a certain amount of which has been volatilised by the heat of the combustion, and has also been driven into all possible openings. The extent to which these substances penetrate may be understood by taking a handful of feathers from the centre of a feather bed that has been subjected to this treatment, when a very strong smell of sulphur will be found. These are both powerful destroyers of the microscopic living organisms, which are believed to be the causes of the infectious diseases, and which are thrown off from the patient into the air and clothing. 95 Then all the stuff articles are removed from the room by the disinfecting contractor in large canvas bags to a van lined with zinc, in which they are taken to the disinfecting station, and put, bags and all, into a large oven or cylinder of iron surrounded by a steam jacket and capable of being, by the steam, heated to a high temperture. Into the cylinder opens a pipe bringing steam at a very great pressure so that the steam is driven into the heart of the thickest roll of blanket that can be put in. It is found that such a great heat is developed (without possibility of burning or scorching because of the moisture) that it is impossible for any "germ" of disease to survive. After undergoing this treatment the articles are sent home in another van. The room has meanwhile had all the paper scraped off the wall and the paint-work scrubbed with soap and water. Thus it is insured that nothing is left to propagate the infection. Sanitary Legislation. The most important event under this heading has been the passing into law of the Public Health (London) Act, 1891. This Act, which has come into force on the first of January of this year, has effected great changes, and produced a great increase of work in the Sanitary Department. Much time was spent in considering the new measure and making arrangements for its working. The following is a report of your Sanitary Committee, the fruit of much labour, stating the principal changes that practically effect the Sanitary Department:— REPORT OF SANITARY COMMITTEE. 1.— "Your Committee beg to report that, pursuant to the reference to them, they have considered the Public Health (London) Act, 1891, which comes into operation on the 1st January next. 2.—"The following are the principal changes made by the Act in the present law upon which it is necessary for the Board to take action, viz.:— 3.—"The Sanitary Authority are to carry out the law relating to smoke consumption (section 23). 96 4.—"The cleanliness, &c., of workshops to be enforced by the Sanitary Authority (section 25). 5.—"Footways of parish roads to be properly swept and cleansed by the Sanitary Authority (section 29). 6.— "Notice to be given by Sanitary Authority of the times appointed for clearing ashpits, earth closets, privies, and cesspools (section 30). 7.—"Factories and workshops to be provided with sufficient and suitable sanitary conveniences (section 38). 8.—"Newly erected houses not to be occupied until the Sanitary Authority have certified that they have a proper and sufficient supply of water Csection48). The same section provides that an occupied house without a proper and sufficient supply of water shall be a nuisance liable to be dealt with under the Act, and, if it is a dwellinghouse, shall be deemed unfit for human habitation. 9—"Copy certificate of infectious disease to be sent to the head teacher of the school attended by the patient (if a child), or by any child who is an inmate of the same house as the patient (section 55). 10.—"The Sanitary Authority to provide disinfecting apparatus and carriages for the removal of articles to be disinfected, and to disinfect premises, bedding, &c., free of charge (sections 59-61). 11.—"The provisions of the Act as to underground rooms used as dwellings to be enforced by the Sanitary Authority (sections 96 and 97). 12.—"The Act amplifies the powers of the Sanitary Authorities in many respects, and your Committee desire to call special attention to the following provisions, which will enable the Board to take action in cases which it has hitherto been impossible to deal with effectually, viz.: (a) the definition of nuisance is extended to include premises in such a state as to be 'dangerous' as well as those which are 'injurious' to health 'section 2); (b) a magistrate may authorise entry at night into a house alleged to be overcrowded (section 115); (e) premises within 40 yards of any street or place are to be deemed unfit for keeping swine (section 17). 13.—"Your Committee recommend that the Board instruct the Sanitary Inspectors to serve notices immediately upon nuisances being brought to their knowledge, in accordance with section 3 of the Act, and to specify in notices under section 4, as far as practicable, the works required to be executed for the purpose of abating or preventing the recurrence of the nuisance complained of. Your Committee also 97 recommend that all the officers of the Board be directed to give information to the Sanitary Inspectors pursuant to section 3 of the Act, of any nuisances which may come to their knowledge. 14.—"It may he necessary to increase the sanitary staff in order to carry out the above-mentioned provisions of the Act, and your Committee recommend that it be referred to the several Local Committees to report as soon as possible what additional appointments (if any), should be made in their respective parishes with that object. 15—"Your Committee recommend that an Inspector be employed in each parish in the district, as is now the ease in some of our parishes, in superintending the collection of house refuse. The Board are liable Tinder the new Act to a penalty of £20 if such refuse is not removed within 48 hours of the request of the occupier of the premises. Your Committee also recommend that cards in the form settled by them and accompanying this report be printed and left at every house in the District, giving notice of the day on which the house refuse will be called for. This system is already carried out in some parts of the District. Your Committee have noted on the card that if a dustman demands any fee or gratuity for removing house refuse he is liable to a fine of 20s. 16.—"Your Committee recommend that a register be kept in each parish of all underground rooms used as dwellings, and that such rooms be inspected once in every six months and a report presented to your Committee upon the result of such inspection. 17.—"Your Committee recommend that the Surveyors be instructed to report to their respective Local Committees as to what steps are in their opinion necessary to be taken with the view of complying with the provisions of section 29 with regard to the cleansing of the footways (for which the occupiers or owners of the adjoining premises have hitherto been responsible) and of section 48 with regard to certificates relating to the water supply of newly-erected houses. 18.- "With reference to the provisions of section 55 your Committee are of opinion that as a copy of certificates of infectious disease will in future be sent to the head teachers of schools it will not be necessary for such cases to be notified, as at present, to the Superintendent of School Board Visitors for the Division. 19.—"Your Committee recommend that the Board suggest to the Local Government Board the desirability of the attention of the governing bodies of general hospitals being called to the provisions of section 73 of the Act relating to non-removal, except for the purpose of burial, of the bodies of persons who have died in hospitals from infectious diseases. 20.—"The provisions of sections 59-61 point to the desirability of the Board themselves providing a disinfecting apparatus. Your Committee are, however, of opinion that the present system of having 98 bedding, &c., disinfected by super-heated steam by a contractor may be continued, but it should be fully carried out by all the parishes in the district. 21.—"Bye-laws are to be made by the Sanitary Authority for the following purposes, viz.:— (a) "For the prevention of nuisances arising from snow, ice, rubbish, &c., in streets (section 16). (b) "For preventing nuisances arising from offensive matter running out of manufactories, butchers' shops, &c. (section 16). (c) "For the preventing of the keeping of animals so as to be a nuisance (section 16). (d) "As to paving yards, &c., of houses (section 16). (e) "With respect to the keeping of water closets supplied with sufficient water (section 29). (f) "For securing the cleanliness of cisterns, &c. (section 50). (g) "For fixing the number of persons who may occupy a house or part of a house which is let in lodgings or occupied by members of more than one family, and for the registration, inspection, cleansing, &c., of such houses (section 94). 22.—"Bye-laws may be made by the Sanitary Authority for the following purposes, viz. :— (h) "For promoting cleanliness, &c., in tents, vans, &c., used for human habitation (section 95). (i) "For removing to hospital persons brought within the district by vessels, who are infected with dangerous infectious diseases (section 66). (h) "With respect to management and charges for the use of mortuaries (section 88). 23. —"Your Committee have under consideration the draft bye-laws as to houses let in lodgings, which were prepared by the Clerk and considered by the Board in January, 1886, and they will report thereon and also as to the existing bye-laws of the Board as to tents and vans used for human habitation, in due course. 24.—"With regard to bye-laws under sections 16, 39, 50, 66, and 88, your Committee are in communication with the Local Government Board as to the model bye-laws which such Board proposes to issue relating to the matters therein referred to. 25.—"Under the provisions of sections 16, 39, and 114, the London County Council are to make bye.laws, which are to be enforced by the Sanitary Authority, with iegard to the following matters, viz. 99 (a) "Prescribing the times for the removal of offensive matter through the streets, and as to the carriages, &c., used therefor (section 16). (b) "As to closing cesspools, &c., removal of refuse, and duties of occupiers of houses as to removal of refuse (section 16). (c) "Water closets, earth closets, privies, ashpits, cesspools, &c. (section 39). "The County Council in making these bye-laws are to consider any representations made by the sanitary authority, and are to send a copy of the proposed bye-laws to such authority not less than two months before applying to the Local Government Board for the confirmation thereof. 26.—"Section 96 of the Act authorises the Sanitary Authority to make general regulations or special orders in particular cases dispensing with or modifying the new requirements of the Act with regard to underground dwellings. Your Committee are of opinion that no such general regulations should at present be made by the Board, but that any applications in the matter that may be made by owners should be considered separately on their merits. 27.—"Your Committee recommend that at the first meeting of the Board after the 1st January next, the several Local Committees be appointed Committees for the purposes of the Act in their respective parishes under the provisions of section 99, and that written authority under seccion 115 to the Sanitary Inspectors to enter premisos for the purposes of the Act be sealed with the seal of the Board. 28.—"Your Committee have settled the necessary forms of notioe under the provisions of the Act, which have been prepared by the Clerk, and recommend that the same be printed in readiness for use as soon as the Act cornea into operation." 15 th October, 1891. An additional Sanitary Inspector has been appointed in each of the parishes of Claphain, Streatham, and Wandsworth. Vaccination. Table X. shews the number of children vaccinated in the district and each sub-district. The number of births registered in the previous year is 100 assumed to give a more correct estimate of the children at the vaccination ages. 4,038 births were registered in 1890, and of these 3,154 were successfully vaccinated, while 276 were left unaccounted for, which is equivalent to 6 8 per cent. TABLE X. SUBDISTRICTS. Number of Births Returned from 1st January to 31st December 1890. Successfully Vaccinated. Insusceptible of Vaccination. Had Small-pox. Dead Unvaccinated. Postponed byMedical Certificate. Removed to District, Vaccination Officer of which has been duly apprised. Removed to places unknown, or which cannot be reached; and cases not having been found. Clapham 1008 779 4 .. 97 30 15 83 Putney 435 327 1 .. 42 28 .. 37 Streatham 1215 899 2 .. 132 55 39 88 Wandsworth 1380 1149 10 .. 116 37 .. 68 Totals 4038 3154 17 .. 387 150 54 276 Inquests. The following table gives particulars of the inquests held during the year. The number was 134, compared with 138 in the previous year, and was 2.2 per cent, of the total deaths. Of the verdicts returned 77 were of death from natural causes, and 54 from violence; of the latter 32 were accidental, 13 were suicidal, 9 were homicidal. There were 3 open verdicts returned. 101 TABLE XI. Inquests. Total. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. I Deaths from Natural Causes: 77 20 7 16 6 28 II Deaths from Violence: (a) Accidental: Falls 7 3 .. 1 .. 3 Dead in bed with mother 7 5 .. .. .. 2 Poisoning with Carbolic Acid 1 1 .. .. .. .. Shock from burns 1 1 .. .. .. .. Drowning 7 .. 4 .. .. 3 Suffocation 3 .. 1 2 .. .. Crushed in lift 1 .. 1 .. .. .. Choked by bone in gullet 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Wound of finger 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Injury to back 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Fracture of skull—knocked down by train 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Run over by cart 1 .. .. .. .. 1 (b) Suicidal: Bullet wound 1 .. 1 .. .. .. Drowning 4 .. 2 .. .. 2 Hanging 5 2 .. 2 .. 1 Cut throat 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Pistol shot 2 .. .. .. .. 2 (c) Homicidal: (i.) Manslaughter— Neglect 1 1 .. .. .. .. Fracture of skull 1 .. .. .. .. 1 (ii.) Wilful murder 4 3 .. .. 1 .. Suffocation 1 .. .. .. .. 1 (iii.) Execution 2 .. .. .. .. 2 (d) Open Verdicts: Found dead 3 1 .. .. .. 2 Totals 134 37 16 21 7 53 102 Sickness and Mortality amongst the Parochial Poor. Table XII. gives the number of cases and deaths that occurred in the sub-districts. The total number of cases coming under treatment was 2,059, as compared with 1,978 in 1890, and the number of deaths was 71, as compared with 80 in the previous year:— 103 TABLE XII. Sickness amongst Union Poor during 1891. SUB-DISTRICTS. Total Cases of Sickness treated in each Sub-District. Total Deaths in each Sub-District. 1.—Small Pox. 2.—Measles. 3.—Scarlatina. 4.—Diphtheria. 5.—Whooping Cough. 6.—Diarrhœa and Dysentery. 7.—Influenza. 8.—Fever. 9.—Erysipelas. 10.—Puerperal Fever. 11.—Lung Diseases, except Phthisis. 12.—Phthisis. 13.—Hydrocephalus, Atrophy Scrofula and Infantile Convulsions. 14—Violence, Privation and Premature Birth 15.—Other Diseases. 16.—Age. Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Clapham 760 26 .. .. 48 4 1 .. .. .. 7 2 36 3 57 .. 22 .. 7 .. 1 .. 163 5 17 3 5 .. .. .. 396 9 .. .. Putney 96 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 .. 4 .. 1 1 .. .. 76 .. .. .. Streatham 223 8 .. .. 15 .. .. .. .. .. 7 .. .. .. 5 .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. 60 .. 1 .. 4 2 .. .. 129 6 .. .. Tooting 143 5 .. .. 19 .. .. .. .. .. 17 .. 10 .. 17 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 26 .. 1 .. 2 2 14 .. 36 2 .. .. Wandsworth 837 31 .. .. 11 2 1 .. 6 .. 4 1 14 .. 29 .. 2 1 9 .. .. .. 189 9 14 4 4 2 55 5 513 3 6 4 Total 2059 71 .. .. 93 6 2 .. 6 .. 35 3 62 3 108 .. 24 1 19 .. 1 .. 450 14 37 7 16 7 69 5 1150 20 6 4 O 104 Table XIII. is in the usual form, and shews the large amount of mostly routine work that is carried out in the year. This table may be said to be a concise account of the work done by the Sanitary Department, and as such will repay careful study TABLE XIII. Summary of Sanitary Operations in the entire District during the year 1891. Clapham. Putney. Streatham. Tooting. Wandsworth. Total. Number of Houses and Premises inspected 3159 3797 4728 525 5471 17680 1st Notices served 1361 775 639 76 827 3678 2nd Notices served 178 136 18 13 65 410 Number of houses disinfected after infectious diseases 145 48 119 9 263 584 Number of houses in which infectious disease recurred after disinfection .. .. .. .. 5 5 Number of houses from which bedding, &c., was burnt .. 1 11 .. .. 12 Bedding stoved 51 41 45 .. 3 140 Overcrowding abated 29 5 10 2 5 51 Rooms cleansed and repaired 939 56 225 12 136 1368 Staircases & passages cleansed and repaired 269 37 87 8 56 457 New drains and drains relaid 105 80 531 10 1614 2340 Number of feet of new sewers and branch drains 3818 13581 7971 .. 12820 38190 Drains cleansed and repaired 376 154 281 29 175 1015 Syphon traps fixed to drains 837 73 314 11 3 1238 Sinks altered to discharge outside over gullies 263 41 111 11 406 832 Bath and lavatory wastes altered to discharge outside over gullies 55 10 27 .. 2 94 Rain water pipes disconnected from drains 119 32 89 13 11 264 Water-closets cleansed and repaired 657 325 163 9 627 1781 Water-closets, supply of water laid on to 12 1 146 15 144 318 Urinals cleansed, repaired, or water laid on 3 7 96 .. .. 106 Accumulation of manure, &c., removed 46 35 67 2 24 174 Cesspools abolished 4 4 39 .. .. 47 Dust-bins provided 253 40 122 15 156 586 Stables drained or paved and cleansed 30 9 6 .. 2 47 Yards drained or paved and cleansed 106 78 37 .. 29 250 Unwholesome or dilapidated houses cleansed & repaired .. 59 116 .. 26 201 Leaky house-roofs and gutters repaired 290 87 48 5 120 550 Houses supplied with water 33 3 23 2 45 106 Water-cisterns covered and repaired 177 83 27 18 162 467 Cistern overflow pipes disconnected from drains .. 6 3 .. .. 8 Wells closed .. 6 .. 1 .. 7 Pig nuisances removed 1 1 3 .. 7 12 Unclassified nuisances 746 41 28 6 62 883 Cases investigated by Magistrates .. .. .. .. 2 2 Compulsory Orders obtained .. .. .. .. 2 2 Compulsory works executed .. .. .. .. .. .. LOCAL SUMMARIES. 108 CLAPHAM. Population. The figure used for calculating the various rates for the year is that obtained by the census enumeration in April, and which will differ very little from the true population of the middle of the year. The population is 43,698. The population in 1881 (Census) was 36,380, an increase of 7,318 in the decennium, or 20 per cent. This is a much smaller increase than in the previous decade. Births. The number of births registered during the year was 1,144—males, 609; females, 535. This is a slightly larger number than in any of the last 10 years, and a distinct increase on that of last year, when the number was remarkably small. The birth-rate was 26.2 per thousand, the highest since 1887. The rate of natural increase, or the excess of births over deaths, was 12.57. Deaths and Death-rate. The number of deaths occurring in the year was 596, of which 273 were of males and 323 of females. The death-rate was 13.63 per thousand of the population, very nearly the same as in the preceding year. Table I. gives particulars of the births, birth-rates, deaths, death-rates, and rates of natural increase for the last 10 years. 109 TABLE I. Births and Death Rates. YEAR. Births. Birth-rate. Deaths from all Causes. Death-rate. Rate of Natural Increase. 1882 1,081 28.8 544 14.5 14.3 1883 1,085 28.2 580 15.1 13.1 1884 1,123 28.3 543 13.7 14.6 1885 1,030 25.2 508 12.44 12.7 1886 1,071 25.5 545 12.99 12.5 1887 1,136 26.3 600 13.93 12.4 1888 1,076 24.3 551 12.4 11.9 1889 1,121 24.3 534 11.6 12.7 1890 1,003 23.2 599 13.88 9.32 1891 1,144 26.2 596 13.63 12.57 Table II. gives particulars of the number, causes of death, ages, and social position of those who have died. TABLE II. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. CLAPHAM. Total Deaths from each Class of Disease, &c., in the Sub-District. Sex. Age. Social Position. Population (censes) 1891 43,698 Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 10 years. From 10 to 20 years. At 20 and under 40 years of age. At 40 and under 60 years of age. At 60 and under 80 years of age. 80 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Classes, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen Clerks, &c. Industrial and Labouring Classes. CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 32 19 13 8 22 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 30 Scarlet Fever 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 4 1 3 .. .. .. .. 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Diphtheria 2 1 1 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Whooping Cough 20 8 12 6 12 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 18 Erysipelas 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. 2 Diarrhœa, Dysentery, and Cholera 12 8 4 6 3 1 .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. 4 8 Influenza 22 6 16 .. 3 .. .. 4 4 10 1 2 1 7 12 Totals of Zymotic Class 96 45 51 21 41 5 .. 9 5 13 2 2 3 14 77 II. Consitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 7 3 4 .. .. 1 .. 1 1 4 .. 1 .. 2 4 Cancer & other Tumours 32 5 27 .. .. .. .. 3 15 11 3 2 4 11 15 Other Constitutional Diseases. 3 1 2 2 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 Tubercular Phthisis 43 28 15 1 .. 1 6 14 17 4 .. 1 1 14 27 Tabes Mesenterica 6 5 1 3 2 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 4 Hydrocephalus 17 10 7 8 4 4 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 13 Scrofula 5 5 .. .. 1 .. 1 1 2 .. .. .. .. 2 3 III. Local. Nervous 74 30 44 17 7 .. 4 3 15 21 7 3 10 21 40 Circulatory 59 28 31 .. 2 .. 3 13 21 19 1 4 4 19 32 Respiratory 125 52 73 28 20 .. 1 8 18 38 12 4 10 36 75 Digestive 32 11 21 9 .. 2 3 4 3 11 .. .. 3 12 17 Urinary 12 10 2 1 .. .. 1 2 2 6 .. 2 .. 2 8 Generative 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Locomotory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 48 23 25 48 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 16 27 Congenital Defects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Old Age 20 7 13 .. .. .. .. .. .. 6 14 2 1 8 9 V. Violence 15 9 6 8 2 .. .. .. 1 3 1 .. .. 2 13 VI. Illdefined and Not Specified. Illdefined .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Not Specified 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Totals 596 273 323 147 79 13 22 59 100 136 40 21 42 165 368 1ll Deaths in Out-lying Institutions. The following Table gives particulars of these deaths occurring in various Institutions outside the Sub-district. There were 97 such deaths, of which 50 occurred in the Union Infirmary at Wandsworth, 40 in the general and special hospitals of the Metropolis, 4 in the hospitals of the Asylums Board, and 3 from accidents before reaching hospital. If these 97 deaths are added to those of Table II. the death-rate becomes 15.8:— TABLE III. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. DISEASES. Sex. Age. Institutions. Total Males. Females. Under 1. 1 to 60. 60 and upwards. Union Infirmary. General & Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever l .. 1 .. l .. .. .. l Diphtheria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases 2 2 .. .. 1 1 2 .. .. Tubercular Diseases 9 4 5 .. 9 .. 6 3 .. Cancer 8 2 6 .. 7 1 4 3 1 Rheumatism 2 .. 2 .. 1 l 2 .. .. Respiratory Diseases 17 11 6 1 9 7 8 9 .. Circulatory Diseases 14 6 8 .. 4 10 8 5 .. Nervous Diseases 14 7 7 .. 9 5 7 5 2 Other Diseases 22 12 10 1 10 11 13 9 .. Violence 8 8 .. .. 4 4 .. 6 .. Totals 97 52 45 2 55 40 50 40 4 Ages at Death. The number of deaths at the different age groups is shewn in Table II. From this it is 112 seen that the following were the percentage of the total deaths Under 5 years 37.9 per cent. From 5 to 60 years 32.6 „ Over 60 years 29.5 „ Infantile Death-rate. The number of deaths of infants under 1 year was 147, and the rate per thousand births (that is per thousand infants living under 1 year of age) was 128, compared with 149 in 1890. Social Position. The proportion of deaths in the various social grades was as follows: — Nobility and Gentry 3.5 per cent. Professional Classes 7.0 „ Middle and Trading Classes 27.7 ,, Industrial and Labouring Classes 61.8 ,, TABLE IV. Zymotic Mortality in Clapham. 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 22 Small-pox 1 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 15 33 33 3 11 25 14 11 17 32 Scarlet Fever 26 8 3 .. 1 6 5 2 2 1 Diphtheria 4 7 8 4 6 10 16 17 4 2 Enteric Fever 7 3 4 8 3 4 5 4 3 4 WhoopingCough 17 16 15 25 34 25 28 15 16 20 Epidemic Diarrhœa 4 19 18 16 25 24 15 11 18 12 Other Zymotic Diseases 7 26 12 5 4 6 1 4 3 3 Total deaths from Zymotic Diseases 81 112 95 61 84 100 84 64 67 96 Zymotic Deathrate 2.1 2.9 2.3 1.49 2.0 2.2 1.9 1.4 1.53 2.19 Death-rate from all Diseases 14.5 15.1 13.7 12.4 12.9 13.9 12.4 11.6 13.88 13.63 113 The above Table gives the number of deaths from the different Zymotic diseases for the last 10 years, with the Zymotic and general death-rates. The number of deaths was 96 and the death-rate 2.19, a low figure, though higher than that of the last 3 ears. If the deaths from Influenza are excluded the rate becomes l-6. Small Pox.—No deaths occurred and no case was notified during the year. Influenza.—An epidemic of this disease broke out again in the late spring of 1891 causing 22 deaths, which were directly attributed to it, and probably many others. Compared with the mortality from the other Zymotic diseases the fatality was great, and the question as to its causation and prevention becomes of great importance. Our knowledge of this is far from being complete, but there is no doubt that it is very infectious, and is found to prevail especially where numbers of people are gathered under one roof, as in factories and places of business. By many there is thought to be some atmospheric condition predisposing to it, but what that condition is, if any, no one has been able to say. There seems no doubt that all diseases at the time of an Influenza epidemic tend to become of a low or adynamic type with great depression of strength and slow convalescence. The chief means to be taken to check its spread is to isolate with every precaution all recognised cases, and to prevent aggregation of individuals as much as possible. There will certainly be a large number of cases of a mild type, which will always escape isolation from not being recognised, so that it is not to be expected that, without fuller knowledge, it will be possible to control it very satisfactorily. At the end of the year and 114 the beginning of the present year 1892, Influenza reappeared for the third time, and has been extensively prevalent. Scarlet Fever.—Only I death was due to this disease, and 1 in a Out-lying Institution. One hundred and ten cases were notified, so the disease was of a very benign type, the case mortality being 1.8 per cent. The number notified in 1890 was 84. Diphtheria caused only 2 deaths, compared with 23,23, and 6 in the preceding three years. The number of cases notified was 23, and 2 of membranous croun. The case mortality was 8 per cent. This decrease is very satisfactory as there has been a marked increase in London during the last few years. Enteric Fever caused 4 deaths, and the notifications were 20, giving a case mortality of 20 per cent. Measles.-Thirty-two deaths were caused by this, the most fatal of the Zymotic diseases. This is a higher number than in any year since 1884. In the summary will be found some observations, with a special report presented by us with reference to the notification of measles. At present we are powerless to do anything to prevent this great loss of life. It has even happened that the Sanitary Inspector has been refused permission to disinfect a room after a fatal case, and as there is no probability of a magistrate considering measles to be a "dangerous infectious disease" nothing more could be done. Whooping Cough resulted in 20 deaths, a figure less than the average for the last 10 years, but greater than in 1889 or 1890. All these deaths were from pulmonary complications, and many should no doubt have been prevented. 115 Diarrhœa caused 12 deaths, a comparatively small number, owing largely to the absence of much hot weather in the summer. Erysipelas.—Fifty cases were notified and there were 2 deaths. The usefulness of notification of this disease is not great, and most of the cases were of a trivial klind. Puerperal Fever—Three cases were notified and 1 death occurred. There were also 2 cases of continued fever notified. Disinfection. Rooms in 145 houses were fumigated with sulphurous acid, and 51 lots of bedding and other articles were disinfected by super heated steam, at a cost to the parish of £83. Some of the disinfection of bedding was done at the cost of the patients' friends. Seventy-six notices were served to cleanse and strip walls and ceilings of rooms after infectious disease, and subsequent to fumigation, Inquests. There have been 37 inquests held during the year, the following being the verdicts:— 1. From Natural Causes 20 2. Accidental— Falls 3 Found dead in bed with mother 5 Poisoning from Carbolic Acid 1 Shocks from Burns 1 10 3. Homicidal— (a) Suicidal—Hanging 2 (b) Manslaughter—neglect 1 (c)Wilful Murder 3 6 4. Open Verdicts— Found dead 1 37 116 Uncertified Deaths. There were 11 deaths registered without medical certificates on the authority of the Coroner. Sanitary Proceedings of the year, 1891. During the year 3,159 houses and premises have been inspected. The total number of nuisances dealt with amounted to 4,513, of these 3,870 were abated under notice, and 643 under promise without formal service of notice. The Table on page 35 gives a statement of the nuisances dealt with that can be conveniently classified. The number of unclassified nuisances was 736, viz.:— 346 water-closets disconnected from drinking water cisterns and a separate supply laid on, 21 sinks repaired, 1 new sink fixed, 8 manure pits provided, 4 water closets ventilated, 5 water-closets re-built, 5 cases of stagnant water, 17 cellar dwellings, 19 new soil-pipes fixed, 15 soil-pipes repaired, 144 new ventilating pipes, 9 ventilating pipes repaired, 65 leaky water fittings, 17 cases of water in the basement of houses, 27 houses with damp walls, 2 privies abolished, 10 dirty bake-houses, 4 smoke nuisances, 2 chimneys re-built, 7 cases of rats, cellar paved, dirty dairy, dead cats, burning rubbish, throwing refuse into roadway, unburied corpse. Animals kept so as to be a nuisance, viz :—Fowls, rabbits, pigeons, and pony. The drains of 105 houses have been entirely reconstructed in accordance with the Board's regulations for new drainage. Housing of the Working Classes Acts, 1890. In 4 instances premises have been found to be in so bad a state that notices under Part II of this Act were served. They resulted as follows:— 1, Newman's Court.—Thoroughly cleansed and repaired, and damp stopped out. 117 4, Bromel's Passage.— Closed, the sanitary arrangements and modes of ventilation of the house rendering it impossible to be made fit for human habitation. Green's Cottage, Bromel's Road.—Thoroughly cleansed and repaired. Nos. 1, 2, and 3, Taylor's Cottages, Waterloo Place.— Closed by order of th« magistrate. The usefulness of the Act is greatly narrowed by the definition contained in it of "Owner," that is a person who has an interest of at least 21 years in the premises. In many cases the owner, according to this definition, has no right of entry and no means of carrying out notices served upon him, or of obeying a magistrate's order. In these cases we have been obliged to proceed under the Nuisance Removal Acts. Cow-houses & Slaughterhouses. All were personally inspected in September, and no opposition was made to the renewal of their licenses. Bake-houses. These were all inspected twice during the year. Lime-whiting was required in 3 instances in May and in 7 in October. At least the usual amount of sanitary work has been carried out during the year. I have every reason to be satisfied with the efficiency and energy displayed by the Inspectors, Messrs. Fairchild and Nurcombe. The Surveyor, Mr. Southam, has always lendered ready help in sanitary matters, and to him my best thanks are due. OLIVER. FIELD, M.D., D.P.H., Medical Officer of Health for Clapham. 118 PUTNEY & ROEHAMPTON. Population. The census population of this sub-district in the year 1891 was 17,771, and the different birth and death rates for the twelve months are ascertained by taking this number as a basis of calculation. Births and Birth-rate. TABLE I Birth and Death Rates. YEARS. Births. Birth-rate. Deaths from all Causes. Death-rate. Rate of Natural Increase. 1882 361 26.3 208 15.1 11.1 1883 349 24.7 224 17.1 7.6 1884 377 25.3 199 13.7 11.6 1885 322 21.7 167 11.2 10.4 1886 352 23.1 179 11.8 11.2 1887 349 22.3 196 12.5 9.8 1888 366 22.9 187 11.7 11.2 1889 376 23.0 182 11.1 11.9 1890 453 25.4 234 13.1 12.3 1891 479 26.9 213 11.9 15.0 Deaths and Death-rate. 479 births were registered during the year, 243 males and 236 females. This gives us a birth-rate of 26.9 per 1,000 per annum, which is the highest birth-rate recorded for this sub-district during the last ten years. This increased birth-rate is rather unusual. The birth-rate recorded for the whole of London has been falling continuously year by year since 1879. 213 deaths were registered during the year, 103 males and 110 females. This is equivalent to a death-rate of 11.9 per 1,000 per annum, which is 9.5 119 below the death-rate of London, and 1.0 below the decennial average for this sub-district. In Table I. the birth and death-rates for the last ten years are tabulated along with the rate of natural increase of the population. This is found by determining the excess of births over deaths of the resident population, and takes no account of other causes, which may be operating towards increasing or diminishing the population from year to year. TABLE II. Deaths in Out-lying Institutions. DISEASE. Sex. Age. Institutions. Total. Male. Female. Under 1. 1 to 60. 60 and upwards. Union Infirmary. General & Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Diphtheria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases 3 1 2 .. 3 .. .. 1 2 Tubercular Diseases 9 3 6 .. 8 1 1 8 .. Cancer 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Respiratory Diseases 7 6 1 1 3 3 4 3 .. Circulatory Diseases 5 4 1 .. 2 3 2 3 .. Nervous Diseases 8 4 4 1 3 4 3 5 .. Other Diseases 12 8 4 1 4 7 6 6 .. Violence 2 1 1 .. 1 1 1 1 .. Total 48 29 19 3 26 19 17 28 3 In Table II. the deaths of parishioners occuring in outlying institutions are recorded. The number this year is considerably in excess of that in former years. There is however no increase in the number of the d 120 ordinary Zymotic Diseases. Under the heading of Other Zymotic diseases, cases of Influenza have been recorded. If the total of 48 outlying deaths be added to those registered within the district, it gives a grand total of 261, and brings the death-rate up to 14.6 per 1,000 per annum. General Mortality in Putney and Roehampton. In Table III. all deaths registered in the sub-district are recorded and classified according to the cause, under the heading of age, sex, and social position. Under the heading of respiratory diseases, the number of deaths is rather remarkable, and it is very much in excess of former years. This excess is, I consider, to be attributed to the Influenza epidemic which attacked this district so violently in the spring of the year. The number of deaths from Cancer has risen again. I have remarked in some of my previous reports the tendency which this disease shows to increase rather than diminish. This fact is borne out in a more decided manner by the Registrar-General's report for 1891. 412 more deaths occurred in London alone, from this one class of disease than the average during the previous ten years. d 2 TABLE III. PUTNEY. Total Deaths from each Class of Disease. Sex. Age. Social Position. Males. Females. Under 1 Year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 15 years. From 15 to 25 years. At 25 and under 35 years. At 35 and under £5 years. At 55 and under 75 years. 75 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen, &c. Industrial & Labouring Classes. Population (Census) 17,771 1891 CAUSES OF DEATH. 1. Zymotic. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Diphtheria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 8 3 5 2 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 6 Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhœa, Dysentery & Cholera 4 3 1 4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 Other Zymotic Diseases 7 4 3 1 1 .. .. .. 1 3 1 .. •• 3 4 Totals of Zymotic Class 22 10 12 7 7 2 1 .. 1 3 1 •• .. 6 16 II. Constitutional. Gout & Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cancer & other Tumours Other Constitutional 9 3 6 .. .. .. .. .. 3 3 3 .. 1 3 5 Diseases 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Tubercular Phthisis 23 12 11 2 .. 1 2 4 11 3 .. .. 6 8 9 Tabes Mes^nterica .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hydrocephalus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scrofula 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 III. Local. Nervous .. 12 11 2 6 1 1 .. 5 6 .. .. 5 5 13 Circulatorv 22 7 15 1 .. .. .. 2 5 10 4 .. 6 5 11 Respiratory 43 16 27 10 5 1 .. 2 7 10 8 .. 6 11 26 Digestive 26 13 13 10 2 1 3 .. 4 4 .. .. 2 10 14 Urinary 8 3 5 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 7 .. .. 8 3 2 Generative 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. Locomotory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 10 7 3 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 Congenital Defects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Old Age 10 5 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 6 1 2 3 4 V. Violence 9 8 1 .. .. 2 3 • • 4 .. .. .. .. 1 8 VI. Ill defined and Not Specified 5 6 .. 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 4 Totals 213 103 110 47 20 8 11 9 41 52 25 1 31 58 123 122 Zymotic Mortality. 22 deaths from diseases of a Zymotic nature occurred during the year. Under the heading of Other Zymotic diseases 7 deaths are recorded. These were the result of the Influenza epidemic and its complications. The Zymotic death-rate was only 1.1. Small Pox. This disease is practically extinct in this sub-district. Since 1880 only 1 death has occurred from it, in the year 1884, and not one case has been notified since the compulsory Notification Act came in force in the year 1889. Lately a few cases have appeared in one or two districts in London. The results of the sittings of the Vaccination Commission has been anxiously awaited by all those interested in Public Health work. The issue of their provisional report will have lamentable consequences so far as the thoroughness with which Vaccination can be carried on is concerned. The feeling against Vaccination is strong only among the poorer and more ignorant classes. If Vaccination is to cease to be compulsory, we shall soon have among us a large population unprotected against this dread disease. The consequence of this in the presence of an epidemic might be appalling. Measles. No deaths were attributed to this disease. 123 TABLE IV. Zymotic Mortality in Putney & Roehampton Sub-district Zymotic Mortality. 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 .. Small Pox .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 6 13 2 1 4 4 2 .. 2 10 .. Scarlet Fever 8 4 7 .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 Enteric Fever 1 4 2 10 3 1 .. 2 1 1 1 Diphtheria 1 29 24 .. 5 1 1 2 .. .. .. Whooping Cough 3 8 2 8 1 18 2 6 6 8 8 Epidemic Diarrhoea 3 5 5 8 4 9 .. 4 .. .. 4 Other Zymotic Diseases 5 6 2 •• 1 8 1 2 •• 1 7 Total Deaths from Zymotic Diseases 27 69 44 28 18 42 7 16 12 21 21 Zymotic Death-rate 2.0 2.0 3.1 1.9 1.2 2.49 0.44 1.0 0.73 1.1 1.1 Death-rate for all Diseases 12.5 15.1 17.1 13.7 11.2 11.8 12.5 11.7 11.1 12.4 11.9 124 Scarlet Fever. Only 1 death was attributed to Scarlet Fever, as occuring in the Sub-district, and another case terminated fatally in one of the hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums Board. 54 cases were notified. The type of the disease was therefore of a mild character. Enteric Fever. Only 3 cases were notified and 1 terminated fatally. Diphtheria. There were no fatal cases of this disease, but 12 cases were notified in the course of 12 months. In my experience most of these cases were of a very mild character. This disease is again very prominent as a cause of death among the Zymotic Class. All the fatal cases were the result of complications occurring in the course of the disease and no doubt preventable in the majority of the cases. Whooping Cough and Measles may be classed together, as being in themselves mild diseases, but yet the cause of the greatest number of deaths among the Zymotic Class of disease. Whether this could be prevented by adding them to the number of notifiable diseases under the Act is a subject on which we have already made a special report. There were 7 cases under the heading of Other Zymotic diseases, which were due to the Influenza epidemic and the complications attending it. The total Zymotic death-rate including those deaths resulting from Influenza was 1.1 per 1,000, which was exactly the same as in the preceding year and slightly above the average. Infantile Mortality. The mortality under this heading has fallen very much during the year. Only 47 deaths occurred among children under 1 year of age, which gives an infantile mortality of 98.3 instead of 154. 125 Social Position. The proportion of deaths in the different social grades is as follows: Nobility and Gentry .46 per cent. Professional 14.55 ,, Middle and Trading 27.23 „ Industrial and Labouring 57.76 ,, inquests. Inquests were held during the year with the following results: 1. From Natural Causes 7 Drowning 4 2. Accidental Suffocation by fire 1 ( Crushed in lift 1 6 3. Suicidal Bullet wound 1 Drowing 2 3 16 Sanitary Pro- By referring to the Summary of Sanitary ceedings ing the year, operations in the entire district, a tabular statement will be found, which will give an idea as to the nature and amount of the Sanitary work which has been accomplished. There were 3797 houses and premises inspected. 775 first notices were served. No compulsory orders had to be obtained for the execution of the works. One application was received for a Certificate of exemption under the Customs and Inland Revenue Act, from the Inhabited House Duty Tax. After examining the premises, situated in Emily Terrace, Coopers' Arms' Lane, I came to the conclusion that the house was not constructed in the manner contemplated by the Act, and I therefore refused to give the Certificate. The disposal of house refuse remains still in an unsatisfactory condition. The Shoot for our house refuse, near the Parish Wharf is within 70 or 80 yards of the nearest inhabited houses, and more are likely to be built 126 still nearer as time goes on. This I hold to be in dangerous proximity. In hot weather there must be considerable fermentation and putrefaction among the vegetable and animal debris mixed up with the refuse. I would urge upon the Board the desirability of taking steps to dispose of the refuse in a more satisfactory and safer manner. The river wharf being now in possession of the Board, it appears to me the easiest and most economical method would be removing it by barge to some unoccupied tracts towards the mouth of the river. All the bakehouses (15) have been inspected as usual and found in a satisfactory condition. In two cases only was it necessary to serve notices. All the slaughter-houses and cow-houses have been inspected and found in a satisfactory condition. During the year a large amount of good and useful Sanitary work has been accomplished without friction, as evidenced by the fact that no compulsory orders had to be obtained. Wm. Y. ORR, M.B.; D.P.H. Medical Officer of Health for Putney & Roehampton. 127 STREATHAM. Vital Statistics. Population. The census in the spring of 1891 revealed the fact that the population of Streatham more than doubled itself during the preceding ten years, increasing at the rate of over 2,000 per annum, and reaching a total of 42,958 in April, 1891. These figures nearly correspond with the estimates I have given in previous years, showing that the statistics for those years were fairly correct. The census population forms the basis for the following statistics, which as usual, are derived from the Registrar General's returns, and the local records of sickness and mortality. Birth and Birth-rate. The number of births registered during the year was 1,084, 553 of males and 531 of females. The birth-rate, calculated from the total number of births and the foregoing estimate of the population was 25.2 per 1000 persons living during the year;this rate is below the decennial average. Natural Increase. The excess of births over deaths only gives a rate of 13.5 per 1000 of the population. Deaths and Death-rate. During the year 1891, 555 deaths were registered in this sub-district. No less than 56 of these deaths occurred in St. Anne's Home, Streatham, the deceased were parishioners of St. Pancras. Excluding 128 these, the death-rate for Streatham is 11.6 per 1000 of the population. This rate is very satisfactory, occurring as it does, in a year when influenza, so much epidemic disease, and so high a rate of mortality prevailed throughout the metropolis generally. When the 56 deaths that took place in St. Anne's Home, and the 38 that occurred in various out-lying general and special hospitals are added to the deaths proper to Streatham, the death-rate becomes 13.7 per 1000. Table I gives the number of births and deaths, birthrates and death-rates, and rates of natural increase for the last ten years. TABLE 1. Birth and Death Rates. YEARS. Births. Birth-rate. Deaths from all Causes. Death-rate. Rate of Natural Increase. 1882 891 33.0 341 12.0 20.4 1883 1,027 36.9 419 14.9 21.5 1884 1,138 39.2 445 15.3 23.9 1885 1,078 1,078 35.6 423 13.9 23.6 1886 34.3 473 15.0 19.2 1887 1,185 30.0 445 11.6 19.1 1888 1,184 26.3 515 11.4 14.8 1889 1,020 25.5 410 10.2 15.2 1890 1,063 25.3 484 11.5 13.7 1891 1,084 25.2 555 11.6 13.5 The deaths that took place in out-lying, general, and special hospitals are given in the following table which shows the nature of the cause of death, the age and sex of the deceased, and the character of the institution in which they died. 129 TABLE II. Deaths in Out-lying Institutions. [###DISEASE. Total. Sex. Aoe. Institution. Male. Female. Under 1. 1 to 60. 60 and upwards. Union Infirmary.' General & Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diphtheria 2 1 1 .. 2 .. .. 1 1 Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tubercular Diseases 4 4 .. .. 4 .. 1 3 .. Cancer 6 2 4 .. 4 2 4 2 .. Rheumatism 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Respiratory Diseases 5 3 2 .. 3 2 3 2 .. Circulartory Diseases 3 3 .. .. 1 2 2 1 .. Nervous Diseases 6 1 4 .. 1 4 4 1 .. Other Diseases 8 5 3 1 3 4 5 3 .. Violence 4 4 .. 1 3 •• 2 2 •• Totals 38 24 14 2 22 14 22 15 1 There were 38 deaths in out-lying institutions as against 61 last year, 24 of males and 14 of females, 22 occurred in the Union Infirmary, 15 in general and special hospitals, and one in the Asylums Board Hospitals. "When these 38 deaths in out-lying districts are added to the deaths that were registered in Streatham, the death-rate is raised to 13.7 per 1000. On the other hand there is no record of the deaths of non-parishioners who died within the sub-district, but there is reason to believe that they nearly, if not quite, equal in number the extra parochial deaths, therefore 11.6 may be accepted as the true death-rate for Streatham for the year 1891. 130 TABLE III. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. STREATHAM. Population 1891 (Census)42,958 Total deaths from each Class of Disease, &c., in the Sub-District. Sex. Age. Social Position. Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 10 years. From 10 to 20 years. At 20 and under 40 years of age. At 40 and under 60 years of age. At 60 and under 80 years of age. 80 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen, Clerks, &c. Industrial and Labouring Classes. CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Influenza . 21 11 10 1 3 1 .. .. 2 12 2 .. 5 10 6 Measles 36 18 18 7 23 5 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1U 26 Scarlet Fever 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. •• Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever 2 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 • • Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Diphtheria 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 19 10 9 6 13 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 .. Erysipelas 4 2 2 .. .. .. .. 1 3 .. .. .. .. 4 .. Diarrhoea, Dysentery, and Cholera. 10 4 6 9 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 9 Other Zymotic Diseases. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals of Zymotic Class 95 48 47 23 40 6 3 2 6 13 2 .. 6 42 47 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 Cancer & other Tumours 32 12 20 .. .. .. .. 4 10 17 1 3 5 11 13 Other Constitutional Diseases. 5 2 3 2 .. .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. 3 2 Tubercular Phthisis 29 16 13 .. 1 2 5 15 5 1 .. .. 2 12 12 Tabes Mesa 4 2 2 1 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 l Hydrocephalus 11 8 3 5 5 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 4 5 Scrofula .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. III. Local. Nervous 77 45 32 17 8 2 1 6 14 28 2 3 12 33 29 Circulatory 46 27 19 .. 2 3 6 11 22 2 3 9 15 19 Respiratory 127 84 43 17 18 2 1 11 11 57 10 4 10 44 69 Digestive 36 20 16 8 1 .. 2 3 7 12 3 1 14 12 9 Urinary 13 7 6 1 • • .. 1 2 5 3 1 .. 2 6 6 Generative .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Locomotory 2 .. 2 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 .. .. I Integumentary 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 •• IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 40 21 19 40 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 5 14 20 Congenital Defects 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .Old Age 29 16 14 .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 19 3 5 7 14 V. Violence 5 3 2 1 .. .. .. 1 2 1 .. 1 1 •• 3 VI. Illdefined and Not Specified Illdefined .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Not Specified •• .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 555 312 243 117 76 16 16 49 73 168 40 22 75 204 264 131 Infantile Death-rate. The deaths of infants under one year of age per 1,000 of the registered births were 108, as compared with 112 in 1890. In registration London the proportion was 154 per 1,000 births. Social Position. The subjoined table gives the proportion of deaths in the several social grades. Nobility and Gentry 22 4 per cent. Professional Classes 75 13.6 „ Middle and Trading Classes 204 36.7 ,, Industrial and Labouring Classes 254 45.7 „ Total deaths 555 100.0 The proportion of deaths was high as compared with last year in the Trading and Industrial Classes, and declined in the Higher and Professional Classes. Zymotic Diseases, their prevalence and fatality. There were 95 deaths in this class, including 21 from influenza. They yield a percentage of 17.1 upon the deaths from all causes. The seven principal diseases in this class give a death-rate of 1.7 per 1,000 of the population. The following table contrasts all the deaths resulting from the seven principal epidemic diseases with the death-rate therefrom, as well as the death-rates from all diseases during the past ten years. 132 TABLE IV. Zymotic Mortality in the Streatham Sub-district. 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 5 7 8 2 11 21 .. 5 12 36 Scarlet Fever 9 2 8 .. .. 4 5 1 .. 1 Diphtheria 4 13 3 5 6 7 30 6 1 1 Enteric Fever 9 8 4 6 3 2 1 1 4 2 Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 1 11 9 7 26 6 22 9 34 19 Epidemic Diarrhoea 3 9 11 12 20 16 13 8 15 10 Other Zymotic Diseases 10 15 11 2 1 7 3 2 13 5 Influenza .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21 Total deaths from Zymotic Diseases 41 65 54 34 67 64 74 32 79 95 Zymotic Deathrate. 1.6 2.3 1.8 1.1 2.1 1.6 1.7 0.8 1.8 1.7 Death-rate from all Diseases 12.6 14.9 15.3 13.9 15.0 11.6 11.4 10.2 11.5 11.6 The total number of deaths from Zymotic Diseases exceeded the decennial average, 76 of the deaths (over two-thirds) from these diseases were due to Measles, Influenza, and Whooping Cough. There were 21 deaths ascribed primarily to Influenza, they nearly all happened in May and June. The Epidemic declined in July, only two deaths occurring in that month. Measles was very prevalent in the months of March, April, and May; no less than 36 deaths resulted from this disease. Doubtless the time of year, and the atmospheric conditions conducive to Influenza, Pneumonia and other Respiratory Diseases had much to do with the fatal character of the Epidemic. No effectual control can be exercised over an Epidemic of Measles, without the adoption of notification. Vide Report on notification of Measles in the combined Report by the Medical Officers of Health. 133 Scarlet Fever. There was only one death from Scarlet Fever, though 105 cases of the disease were notified during the year, they were however mild in character. Two-thirds were removed to Hospital, the remainder, having means of isolation, were treated at home. As to distribution, quite a third of the cases occurred in the first half of the year, in a limited area, amongst children attending the public schools. The outbreak was difficult to control in proportion to its mild character. Some cases, I believe, escaped recognition, they were hardly ill at all, and by mixing with others at play and school, spread the disease. In no other way can I explain the prolonged course of the outbreak, nearly all the cases were removed to Hospital on notification, though there was difficulty in persuading the parents of the necessity, the cases being often so very slight. However this was effected in all cases with the co-operation of the medical attendants, and after removal, the houses were thoroughly disinfected and cleansed, and no fresh cases occurred in them. But for notification, this would have become, I believe, a wide spread epidemic. As it was, it was most difficult to stop, breaking out again and again in fresh places. Diphtheria. Only three deaths occurred from this disease, one at home, and two in the Asylums Board Hospitals. This is below the decennial average. Forty cases were notified during the year, mostly mild in character. Towards the end of January, and early in February, two cases were notified in an Orphanage, and gave cause for anxiety. The patients were promptly removed to Hospital, the house on inspection was found to have many grave sanitary defects. These were all remedied, no fresh cases occurred afterwards. Typhoid Fever. Resulted in two deaths, 14 cases were notified. The drains were all thoroughly examined in 134 these cases, and also after Diphtheria and Scarlet Eever, and any defects remedied. Whooping Cough accounted for 19 deaths. Diarrhoea for 10 and Erysipelas for 4. There was no death from Small-pox, nor has there been one during the decennium. The following table gives the total number of notified diseases, the number of cases removed to Hospital, and the number of deaths that took place in both the Subdistrict, and in Hospital. TABLE V. DISEASE. Number cases notified. Number Patients removed to Hospital. Number died in Hospital. Number died at Home. Total deaths in Hospital and at Home. Scarlet Fever or Scar- 105 69 — 1 1 Erysipelas latina 26 — — 4 4 Diphtheria 40 17 2 1 3 Enteric or Typhoid 14 5 — 2 2 Totals 185 91 2 8 10 The death-rate from notified diseases was 0.23 per 1,000 of the population. At page 23 of the combined report, our procedure under the Notification Act is given in detail. Other Diseases. The subjoined table shows the proportion of deaths under the heads Constitutional, Local, Developmental, and Violence and Ill-defined, in the Mortality Table. 135 Many of the causes of death under these headings differ so little from their averages, that they require no comment. The deaths from Respiratory diseases on the other hand, were largely in excess of former years, and contributed 127 deaths to the total mortality. No less than 32 of these were ascribed to pneumonia. The 21 deaths from Influenza were complicated with pneumonia, as were great part of the deaths from measles. In this connection, respiratory diseases were accountable for nearly one-third of the total mortality. E TABLE VI. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF NON-ZYMOTIC MORTALITY. Causes of Death. 1889. 1890. 1891. Constitutional. Tubercular 50 49 41 Other Constitutionall Diseases 21 34 38 Local. Nervous 77 68 77 Circulatory 37 28 46 Respiratory 65 95 127 Digestive 35 29 36 Urinary 13 13 13 Generative 7 3 .. Locomotory .. .. 2 Integumentary .. .. 1 Developmental. Premature Birth Malformation 44 45 41 Low Vitality Age 20 40 29 Violence 9 9 5 Ill-defined or .. 3 1 Not specified 136 The severe cold and dense fogs of the spring and early summer, accounted in great measure for this result. There was an increase of deaths from cancer, and a considerable decline in the deaths from tubercular diseases, as compared with the two previous years. Age at Death. Infant Mortality. The number of deaths of infants under one year of age was 117, under five 193, and under 20,225. They respectively formed 21.0, 31.7 and 41.2 per cent. of all deaths, as against 25.1, 37.3 and 40.5 of the previous year. There was a decline of 4 per cent. in the proportion of deaths of infants under one year, and of 3 per cent, of the deaths of children under five years of age. Senile Mortality. There were 29 deaths from old age associated with disease. Of these, 15 were of males and 14 of females; they yield a percentage of 5.2 on all deaths. The total number of deaths at 60 and upwards was 20.8, of these 98 were over 70; 36 were 80 and upwards; the ages of 4 were 90 and upwards. I give below a statement of deaths at high ages in tabular form with the age at different periods and the sex of the deceased. They formed 37.4 per cent of all deaths. TABLE VII. Age. Males. Females. . At 70 and under 75 19 12 31 75 „ „ 80 16 13 29 80 „ „ 85 13 11 24 85 „ „ 90 4 5 9 90 „ „ 95 2 2 4 Total 54 43 97 E 2 137 Parish Poor. The figures relating to the sickness and mortality of the parish poor are given in Table XII. In the zymotic class, cases of Measles, Whooping Cough and Influenza were attended, from which no deaths arose. In the other classes, respiratory diseases, as usual, formed a considerable proportion of the cases that came under treatment. A very large proportion of the cases treated come under heading "Other Diseases," in the Table. This includes diseases of the digestive and nervous system, as well as other local and constitutional disorders. The total mortality formed 8 per cent, of cases attended. inquests. Twenty-one inquests were held with the following verdicts:— I. Natural Heart Disease 8 Apoplexy 2 Convulsions 3 Syncope 1 Phthisis Pulmonalis 3 Pleurisy 1 Inanition 1 Diarrhoea 1 Rupture Aneurism Aorta 1—16 II. Accidental Suffocation 2 Fall in Street 1—3 III. Suicidal By Hanging 2-2 21 Uncertified Deaths. Heart Disease 1 Natural Decay 3 Syncope 3 Paralysis 1 Exhaustion 1 Convulsions 1 Whooping Cough 1 Premature Birth 1 12 138 Sanitary Legislation. Public Health (London) Act consolidates all the acts bearing on the subject. A large amount of time has been devoted to the consideration of its provisions, and frequent attendance on the meetings of the Sub-Committees of the Sanitary Committee, to whom was referred for consideration, the Public Health (London Act,) 1891, and to report thereon. The report is given in extenso in the combined report. Particulars of the principal sanitary works of the year are given in Table XIII. The figures in this table show an increase under most of the headings. The number of house to house inspections was 4,728, about the same as last year, and represents a very large amount of work. Probably some of these separate inspections called for repeated visits afterwards to see if the necessary works had been carried out, so that the figures only partially represent the actual work of the Inspectors, 639 first notices were served to remedy defects and abate nuisances; only 18 second notices were required. Much work also was done on requisition, and does not appear in the Table. 166 rooms in 119 houses were disinfected after infectious diseases. In all instances, fumigation with sulphur was practised, the bedding and clothing was subjected to super-heated steam in 45 cases. This was generally carried out when the patients were treated at home. The bedding was burnt in eleven instances; in no case was there a recurrence of the disease after disinfection. The figures in respect of new sewers, of new drains, and of drains relaid are given in the table. There were 314 syphon traps fixed to drains as compared with 87 in the previous year. Over 300 waterclosets were cleansed, repaired, or had water supply laid on as compared with 159 last year. 139 39 cesspools were abolished. 122 dust bins were provided. 3 wells were closed, 3 pig nuisances removed. In no instance was it necessary to apply to magistrates for compulsory orders. The Table gives other particulars, and will repay examination. It shows clearly that sanitary work is being carried out vigorously all round. The bake-houses, 29 in number, have been twice inspected. I personally inspected the cow-sheds and slaughterhouses and saw no objection to renewal of the licenses. In spite of adverse climatic conditions and the exceptional mortality from Influenza, Respiratory Diseases and Measles, the death-rate is only 11.6, below the decennial low average of 12.8 which is in turn below the death-rate of the healthiest rural districts. The death-rate from notifiable Zymotic diseases was only 0.23 per 1,000. The Infantile death-rate was also a low one. I am glad to be able to show so satisfactory a state of things as regards the public health and sanitary condition of Streatham. I have to thank the Sanitary Officers for their attention and assistance. They carry out their responsible duties with zeal, discretion and ability. F. F. SUTTON, M.D., Medical Officer of Health for Streatham. 140 TOOTING. The public health of Tooting for the year 1891, will compare favourably with the previous year. Birth and The birth-rate is higher and the death- Deaths. rate lower than in 1890. The birth-rate is 29.08, and the death-rate is 16.03. In the previous year the birth and death-rates were 26.2 and 18.6 respectively. Births, Birth-rate and Rate of Natural Increase. Exclusive of outlying Institutions there were 93 deaths recorded in Tooting. The births registered numbered 173, 87 males and 86 females. The rate of natural increase was 10.8 per 1,000. 8 deaths took place in outlying Institutions. 5 were of males and 3 of females. Further particulars as to age, cause of death, etc., will be found on looking at the accompanying Table I. There was no death attributable to Zymotic disease. 141 TABLE I. Deaths in Outlying Institutions. DISEASE. Total. | Sex. Age. Institutions. Male. Female. Under 1. 1 to 60. 60 and upwards. Union Infirmary General & Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tubercular Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cancer 1 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Rheumatism .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Respiratory Diseases 4 3 1 .. 3 1 1 3 .. Circulatory Diseases 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. Nervous Diseases .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Other Diseases 2 1 1 1 1 .. .. 2 .. Violence .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 8 5 3 1 6 1 l 7 .. Death recorded in Tooting. Table II. will be found all the necessary details as to age, sex, and causes of death of persons resident in the district. 21 deaths were of infants under 1 year of age, 18 over 60, and 8 of 80 years and upwards. Of the latter class one was aged 80, one 84, three 85, one 86, one 87, and one had attained the remarkable age of 101 years. As regards class distribution, we find that 4 deaths took place amongst the gentry, 10 in the professional and mercantile classes, 37 in the middle and trading classes, and 42 in the industrial and labouring population. Once again we have been visited by the scourge of Influenza. 3 deaths, all females, all over 60 years of age, are stated to be due to this cause; though as 14 deaths are placed 142 under the heading of Respiratory diseases there can be little doubt that Influenza is responsible for at least some of them. It is interesting to add that all the deaths placed under Influenza took place amongst the richer classes. On the other hand every death from Respiratory diseases happened amougst the poorer: none amongst the gentry. 5 deaths were due to Phthisis, 4 beiug of males and 1 a female. Inquests held. 7 inquests were held during the year and in all the cases except 2, verdicts were returned of death from natural causes. In 1 a verdict of wilful murder was returned, the death being that of an infant who died from Haemorrhage; and in the other one of manslaughter against a Midwife, who was duly committed for trial at the Old Bailey, but was acquitted there, the jury stopping the case and saying they were quite satisfied there was no criminal negligence. 143 TABLE 11. TOOTING. Population (Census) 5,246 1891 ) Official Population in middle of 1891 5,700 Total Deaths from each Class of Disease, &c., in the Sub-District. Sex. Age. Social Position. Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 5 years. From 5 to 10 years. From 10 to 20 years. At 20 and under 40 years of age. At 40 and under 60 years of age. At 60 and under 80 years of age. 80 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen, Clerks, &c. Industrial & Labouring Classes. CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Puerperal Fever 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Diphtheria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Whooping Cough 10 8 2 3 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 6 Erysipelas .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhœa, Dysentery, and .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Influenza 3 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 1 1 l 1 Totals of Zymotic Class 14 8 6 3 7 .. .. 1 .. 2 1 1 2 6 6 II. Constitutional. Gout and Rheumatism 3 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 .. .. .. 2 1 Cancer & other Tumours 3 .. 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. 1 2 Other Constitutional 7 3 4 3 1 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 4 2 Tubercular Phthisis 6 4 1 1 .. .. .. 2 2 .. .. .. .. 3 2 Tabes Mesenterica 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. Hydrocephanlus .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scrofula .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. III. Local. Nervous 9 6 3 2 6 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 3 5 circulatory 14 9 5 .. .. .. 2 .. 9 3 .. .. 2 9 3 Respiratory 14 9 6 4 4 1 .. .. .. 3 2 .. 1 6 7 Digestive 4 3 1 I 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 3 Urinary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Generative 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. locomotory .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth and Low Vitality 6 3 2 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 4 Congenital Defects) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Old Age 9 2 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 6 2 2 1 4 V. Violence 1 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 VI. Illdefined and Not Specified Illdefined 3 1 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 2 Not Specified .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Totals 93 61 42 21 20 3 3 5 15 18 8 4 10 37 42 144 Zymotic Mortality. The deaths from Zymotic disease will be seen on referring to Table III. Out of the 14 deaths from these diseases no fewer than 10 are attributable to Whooping Cough. This is a complaint over which we have unfortunately but little control, as it does not come under the Infectious Diseases Notification Act. Being more or less present with us it is often treated, even amongst the comparatively well to do, in the most perfunctory manner, and children are allowed by their parents to go out and about in most unsuitable weather, and, as a natural consequence, contract various Respiratory complications which so often prove fatal. Excluding the deaths from Whooping Cough the Zymotic morfality is very small, and although the Zymotic death-rate is somewhat in excess of 1890, yet it is lower than in 1889. Of the 4 other deaths placed under this heading 3 are due to Influenza (also excluded from the Notification Act) and 1 to Puerperal Fever. Not 1 death is due to Scarlet Fever, Measles or Enteric Fever. The Zymotic death-rate is 2.0. Last year it was 1.6, and in 1889, 2.4. TABLE III. Zymotic Mortality in Tooting Sub-district. 1889 1890 1891 Small-pox .. .. .. Measles 6 1 .. Scarlet Fever 1 .. .. Typhus Fever .. .. .. Enteric Fever .. 1 .. Whooping-Cough 3 2 10 Epidemic Diarrhoea 1 3 .. Other Zymotic Diseases .. .. .. including Influenza 1 2 4 Total Deaths from Zymotic Diseases 12 9 14 Zymotic Death-rate 2.4 1.6 2.0 Death-rate from all Diseases 13.16 18.6 16.03 145 In my report for last year, in referring to the working of the Infectious Diseases Notification Act, I expressed my regret—"that the enactment, that the head of the household, us well as the medical attendant, should notify the out-break of Infectious disease, is practically a dead letter." Since then I have seen no reason to alter the opinion I there expressed. At present the doctor is not unfrequently looked upon in the light of an "informer," and the visit of the Inspector of Nuisances is resented by the patient, his friends, or both—when he calls to perform the necessary duties of fumigation, etc. Much needless friction might be avoided if the head of the household were made to realize his responsibility. Sanitary Proceedings. The usual inspection of slaughter-houses, dairies and bake-houses has taken place, and no reason found for opposing the renewal of their licenses in any case. A suitable Parish Mortuary has been built with rooms for Post-Mortem examinations, the isolation of bodies dying from Infectious diseases, etc. The summary of the sanitary operations carried on during the year will be found in the report of the combined district. I am pleased to state that Mr. Friedlander, the Inspector of Nuisances, has carried out his duties of fumigation, etc., in a satisfactory manner, and with unfailing tact and discretion. C. de LISLE BROCK, Medical Officer of Health for Tooting. 146 WANDSWOR'J H. Notwithstanding the great prevalence of zymotic diseases by which, in common with the rest of the Metropolis, this sub-district was visited during the year 1891, the death-rate was greatly below the average. Such a satisfactory result was scarcely to be expected under the circumstances which were rendered more unfavourable by a recurrence of the Epidemic of Influenza, and by the excessive fatality from diseases of the Respiratory-organs which resulted from that disease. The record is the more gratifying by reason of the circumstance that although the zymotic diseases were so numerous the lowness of the death-rate has been essentially due to a diminution of their fatality. Evidence of the conditions referred to will be seen on examination of the following statistics, the tabulation of which and the items of information derived therefrom are arranged in the same manner as heretofore for the purpose of affording facility of reference and of comparison with those of former years. 147 Vital Statistics. Population. The mean number of inhabitants of this sub-district estimated to the middle of the part year amounted to 47,161. This estimate is based on the assumption that an increase of the population has taken place since the period of the last Census in the same proportion as that which obtained during the preceding ten years; and as the Census was so recently taken there is little room for doubt of its accuracy. births, Birth-rate, Rate of Natural Increase. 1597 births, 814 of males and 783 of females, were registered during the year; they were 185 more than in the year previous, and allowing for increase of population, 82 more than the preceding decennial average. The birth-rate, which was unusually high, was 35.48 per 1,000, and the rate of natural increase 21 per 1,000 persons of all ages. Mortality. The total deaths registered were 780; 389 of males, 391 of females. The number closely corresponds with the average corrected for increase of population. No less than 142 of the number occurred in the following public institutions, viz.:—In the Middlesex County Lunatic Asylum, 93; in the Hospital for Incurables, 13 ; in St. Peter's Hospital, 4; in the Workhouse, 18; in the Prison, 11; and in the Royal Patriotic Asylum for Girls, 3. All the deaths with their causes are enumerated in the following Table. They are arranged in classes in accordance with the system of the Registrar-General, showing the number in each class, and as regards the several diseases of the Zymotic class, the number of each disease, together with the age at death at eight periods, and the sex and social position of the deceased;— 148 TABLE I. STATISTICS OF MORTALITY. WANDSWORTH. Population (Census) 1891 46,720. Official Population in middle of 1891 47,161. Total Deaths from each class of Disease, &c., in the Sub-District. Sex. Age. Social Position. Males. Females. Under 1 year. From 1 to 6 years. From 5 to 10 years. From 10 to 20 years. At 29 and under 40 years of age. At 40 and under 60 years of age. At 60 and under 80 years of age. 80 years and upwards. Nobility and Gentry. Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c. Middle and Trading Class, Shopmen, Clerks, &c. Industrial and Labouring Classes. CAUSES OF DEATH. I. Zymotic. Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 10 5 5 2 7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 Scarlct Fever . 2 1 1 .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2, Continued Fever .. 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 1 Enteric 3 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 1 Puerperal Fever 2 .. 2 .. .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 Diphtheria 19 7 12 1 10 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 3 16 Whooping Cough 18 11 7 10 7 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 8 Influenza 15 .. 9 2 .. .. .. 4 4 4 .. 1 2 4 8 Diarrhœa, Dysentery, Cholera. 25 11 14 16 5 .. .. 2 1 1 .. .. 2 23 Other Zymotic Diseases 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Totals of Zymotic Class 97 44 53 31 30 10 2 11 7 5 1 1 2 22 72 n. Constitutional. Grout and Rheumatism 5 4 1 .. .. 1 1 .. 1 2 .. .. 1 .. 4 Cancer & other Tumours '27 5 22 .. .. .. 1 .. 16 9 1 3 1 14 9 Other Constitutional Diseases 5 5 .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5 Tubercular Phthisis 83 38 45 4 5 1 4 31 29 9 .. 2 3 23 55 Tabes Mesenterica 11 6 5 6 2 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. 3 8 Hydrocephalus 6 4 2 2 2, 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 4 Scrofula 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. III. Local. Nervous 104 60 44 17 9 .. 2 16 25 32 3 2 7 29 66 Circulatory 39 14 25 .. .. .. 2 5 12 20 .. 6 1 13 19 Respiratory 201 94 107 43 46 1 3 13 39 47 9 0 10 60 126 Digestive 51 22 29 18 4 1 1 6 10 10 1 3 5 18 25 Urinary 22 17 5 1 .. .. 5 3 12 1 1 1 12 8 Generative 9 .. 9 .. .. .. .. 6 3 .. .. 1 2 3 3 Locomotory 2 2 .. .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 2 Integumentary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. IV. Developmental. Premature Birth, and Low Vitality, 53 33 20 52 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 8 42 Congenital Defects 13 7 6 12 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4 9 Old Age 27 12 15 .. .. .. .. .. .. 11 16 2 2 4 19 V. Violence 24 21 3 2 3 1 3 6 6 3 .. .. 1 4 19 VI. Ill-defined and Not specified Ill-defined .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Not specified .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• Totals 780 389 391 190 106 18 22 99 152 161 32 26 39 220 495 149 In addition to those registered the following deaths occurred in Hospitals and other Institutions situated without the sub-district, and are recorded in the following Table, which shews their number and where they took place. They amounted to 166, viz.:—In the Infirmary of the Union, 100; in the Hospitals of the Metropolitan Asylums' Board, 25 ; and 43 in General and Special Hospitals. The number is 13 in excess of that of the previous year. TABLE 11. Deaths in Out-lying Institutions. DISEASE. No. Sex. Age. Institutions. Male. Female. Under 1. 1 to 60. 60 and upwards. Union Infirmary. General and Special Hospitals. Asylums Board Hospitals Small Pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Scarlet Fever 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. 1 Diphtheria 5 2 3 .. 5 .. .. l 4 Whooping-Cough 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. Influenza 4 3 1 .. .. 4 3 l .. Enteric Fever .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diarrhoea 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. Other Zymotic Diseases. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Total Zymotic Diseases 12 7 5 1 7 4 5 2 5 Tubercular Diseases 24 7 17 1 21 2 11 11 2 Cancer 13 5 8 .. 7 6 8 5 .. Rheumatism • • .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Respiratory Diseases 32 16 16 3 8 21 25 6 1 Circulatory Diseases 17 6 11 .. 7 10 10 6 1 Nervous Diseases 32 22 10 .. 15 17 13 6 13 Other Diseases 17 7 10 .. 9 3 11 6 .. Violence 4 2 2 .. 4 .. 3 1 .. Age 15 6 9 .. .. 15 14 .. 1 Total 166 78 88 10 78 78 100 43 23 150 Death-rate. The death-rate of the past year determined from the foregoing estimated population, after correction made for the public institutions by which the death-register is unduly raised, was 14.48 per 1,000. This rate is 1 47 less than that of the year preceding, and 2.52 less than that of the healthiest of the rural districts. If the deaths that occurred in hospitals and other public institutions situated without the Sub-district were included the rate would be 18.1 per 1,000, but as has been explained in previous Reports, this calculation cannot be justly accepted inasmuch as while it includes the deaths of parishioners who have died without the Sub-district, it does not exclude the deaths of nonparishioners who have died within the Sub-district, the number of which there is no means of correctly ascertaining, but which may be assumed to approximate the number of deaths in out-lying institutions. The Birth and Death-rates for the past and ten preceding years are compared in the next Table:— TABLE III. Birth and Death Rates. Years. Births. Birth-rate. *Deaths from all causes. Death-rate. Rate of Natural Increase. Corrected. Uncorrected. 1881 901 33.70 507 17.43 17.97 16.61 1882 972 35.28 544 17.49 18.70 17.79 1883 907 32.07 499 16.17 16.71 15.90 1884 1,072 36.72 576 17.23 18.77 18.84 1885 1,122 37.37 628 18.82 19.93 18.55 1886 1,255 40.40 722 19.05 22.33 21.35 1887 1,338 41.96 610 15.58 18.40 24.59 1888 1,451 44.36 711 18. 07 20.90 21.78 1889 1,415 42.20 494 11.18 14.79 24.51 1890 1,412 32.74 787 15. 95 17.37 16.79 1891 1,597 35.48 780 14.48 16.53 21.00 *Deaths in Outlying Institutions not included. 151 Causes of Death. The relative proportions in the causation of mortality borne by the several groups into which the diseases and other causes of death are classified, are seen on reference to Table I. to have been as follows:—To the Zymotic group 97 deaths were attributed, and to the Non-Zymotic 659; the latter including Constitutional 138; Local 428; Developmental 93; and Violence 24. Zymotic Diseases. The whole of the 97 deaths referred to this group of diseases, with one exception, belonged to the Epidemic class. They were 48 in number less than in 1890, and 29 less than the corrected decennial average; they represented a death-rate of 2 per 1,000 of the population, or 1.3 less than the average, and 10.3 per cent. of the total mortality, or 7.3 per cent. less than the average. The total number of deaths that resulted from Zymotic diseases during the past and ten preceding years, and the relative proportion which they bore to the deaths from all causes are shewn in the following Table. The deaths from the seven principal epidemic diseases of the class are set forth separately, and their increase or decrease in 1891 compared with their preceding decennial averages corrected for increase of population:— 152 TABLE IV. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF ZYMOTIC MORTALITY. Diseases. 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1891. No. above corrected average. No. below corrected average.  Seven 'principal Epidemic Diseases. Small Pox 9 .. .. 1 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1.7 Measles 5 18 14 6 19 28 20 39 7 47 10 .. 16 Scarlet 19 9 5 5 3 6 1 4 .. .. 2 .. 4 Fever Dinhtheria 4 3 11 4 6 10 2 5 6 10 19 13 .. Fever Typhus 1 9 12 4 4 8 6 5 4 5 5 .. 2 Enteric Whooping 12 26 5 17 24 31 8 40 6 35 18 .. 7 Cough Diarrhoea 19 29 10 27 35 28 30 32 21 37 25 • • 9 Cholera Total Deaths from above Epidemio Diseases 69 94 57 64 94 111 67 125 44 134 81 .. 39 Other Zymotic Diseases 7 14 20 19 3 5 4 2 3 11 *16 5 .. Total Deaths from Zymotic Diseases 76 108 77 83 97 116 71 127 47 145 97 .. 24 Zymotic Deathrate per 1,000 population 2.71 3.72 2.57 2.70 3.07 3.58 2.14 3.73 1.35 3.2 2 .. 1.3 Total Deaths from all causes 507 544 499 576 628 722 610 711 494 787 780 = = Percentage of Deaths from Epidemics to Deaths from all causes 13.6 17.2 11.4 11.1 14.9 15.3 10.9 17.5 8.90 17.0 10.3 •• 7.3 * Inclusive of 15 from Influenza. 153 The following are details of the prevalence and fatality of each member of the zymotic group, viz.:— Smallpox. No death resulted from this disease during the year. Four cases of very slight modified form, so slight as to be barely distinguishable from chicken-pox, were notified. Three of the cases occurred in one family. The Official Return of public vaccination made by the Vaccination Officer to Local Government Board may here be referred to. This document shews that of the 1,380 children whose births were registered in the Subdistrict during the year 1890, 1,149 were successfully vaccinated; 110 died without having been vaccinated; in 37 the operation was postponed on account of sickness; 10 were certified as insusceptible, and the remaining 68 or 4-9 per cent., had removed to places which either could not be reached or could not be ascertained. Measles. The epidemic of this disease which prevailed so extensively in 1890, and caused 47 deaths, resulted in 10 only during the past year, or 16 below the decennial average. Erysipelas. This disease, 90 cases of which were notified, was not attended with fatality either in the Sub-district or in Hospital, in which latter one case only was treated. Scarlatina. The total cases of this disease which were notified, were 177 in number; of these 72 were removed to Hospital for treatment. Although so extensively prevalent the disease resulted in 2 deaths only in the Sub-district and 1 in Hospital. The number is 4 less than the corrected average. Diphthena. The deaths referred to this disease numbered 19, and were 13 above the corrected average. The number of cases notified was 89, of which 19 were treated in Hospital where 5 died. 154 Fever. As in the year previous 7 deaths resulted from the following forms of Fever, viz.:—Fnteric (or Typhoid), 3; Puerperal, 2; and Continued, 2. The number of cases notified was: Enteric, 27; Puerperal, 4; Continued, 2; and Typhus, 1. Six Enteric and the single case of Typhus were treated in Hospital and recovered. Whooping-cough. From this disease 18 deaths occurred and 1 in Hospital. The number is exactly half of the year previous, and 7 less than the corrected average. Diarrhœa. Diarrhœa, as usual the most fatal of the zymotic group, caused 25 deaths in the Sub-district and 1 in Hospital. The number is less by 11 than in the previous year and 9 less than the average. With 4 exceptions all the deaths occurred to young children, 17 of whom were under one year of age. Influenza. This epidemic recurred during the past year with increased severity, and caused 15 deaths (4 of which took place in out-lying institutions), and were 12 in excess of the number of the year preceding; while a still greater fatality is doubtless attributable to its immediate or remote effects as represented by the excessive number of deaths from diseases of the respiratory-organs. On reverting to Table 4 it is seen that Influenza and Diphtheria were the only diseases of the zymotic group which exceeded their respective averages, all the others having been less, and some very much less than their average amount. In illustration of the foregoing statistics the numbers of the several diseases notified, of the patients removed to Hospital, and of the deaths that resulted in Hospital, as well as in the Sub-district, during the year are recorded in the next Table:— 155 TABLE V. NOTIFICATION OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES. DISEASE. No. oases notified. No. patients removed to Hospital No. died in Hospital No. died at Home Total deaths in Hospital and at Home Small-pox (modified) 4 .. .. .. .. Scarlatina 177 72 1 2 3 Erysipelas 90 1 .. .. .. Diphtheria 89 19 5 19 24 Membranous-Croup 6 .. .. 5 5 Enteric Fever 27 6 .. 3 3 Continued Fever 2 .. .. . 2 2 Puerperal Fever 4 .. .. 2 2 Typhus Fever 1 1 .. .. .. Total 400 99 6 33 39 On reference to the figures it is seen that 39 deaths resulted, or 9.75 per cent. of all cases notified. In the year previous the ratio of deaths to cases was 11 per cent. If the per case fatality be accepted as the exponent of the intensity of disease, the difference between the ratio of the year 1890 and that of the year 1891 represents a diminished intensity of the diseases notified during the latter year to the extent of that difference. The months in which the deaths from the seven principal epidemic diseases occurred and the total number in each quarter in relation to its mean temperature are shewn in the following Table:— 156 TABLE VI. DISEASE. January February March April May June July August September October November December Mean Temp. 37.6 Mean Temp. 51.6 Mean Temp. 59.3 Mean Temp. 45.0  Small-pox .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Measles 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 6 Scarlatina .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Diphtheria .. 1 .. .. 1 6 1 .. 1 .. 1 8 Whooping Cough 1 2 .. .. 3 1 2 1 1 1 3 Diarrhoea 1 1 .. .. .. .. 5 8 7 .. 3 .. Fever .. 1 •• 2 .. .. .. .. .. 2 •• .. Totals 3 6 5 2 6 6 8 9 8 4 5 17 14 14 25 26 It will be found that the deaths in the third and fourth quarters very greatly exceeded the numbers in the other quarters, and that the excess was principally due to Infantile Diarrhoea in the third, and to Measles and Diphtheria in the fourth. The mean temperature of the three first quarters was 1.2° below the average of the past 50 years; that of the fourth quarter was higher than the average by 0.8°, the mean temperature of the year having been 48.4° or 0.8° below the average. A noticeable feature in the Table is that the periods of lowest temperature are associated with the lowest number of deaths. Non-Zymotic Diseases. Of the total 780 causes of death 659 belonged to this group. The number is no less than 271 more than in the previous year. This great increase was principally due to Respiratory Diseases. diseases of the Organs of Respiration, which were the most fatal of all the classes in this group. They 157 were 201 in number, to which Bronchitis contributed 114, and Pnenmonia 67, and exceeded the corrected average by 68. The excess was the result of the epidemic of Influenza. Constitutional. The next most fatal class was the Constitutional, which includes the Tubercular diseases, Consumption, Scrofula, &c., with Cancer, Tumours, and others of constitutional origin. The number amounted to 138, Consumption alone contributing 83, or 14 more than in the previous year; the excess being doubtless attributable to the effects of Influenza in common with that of the other diseases of the Respiratory-Organs. Nervous. Diseases of the Brain and Nervous System were the next in order of fatality, numbering 104. The number is 35 less than the average, the decrease corresponding with that in the number of deaths in the Middlesex County Lunatic Asylum. Digestive. The deaths from these diseases amounted to 51, and were 9 in excess of the average. Generative. From this class the deaths were twice the average number. From these causes 66 deaths resulted, and Premature Birth, Low Vitality, and Congenital Defects. were 18 in excess of the average number. The reason of this excess is not apparent, but looking to the extensive prevalence of Influenza, the increase might be not unreasonably assumed to have been another effect of that disease. Urinary, The deaths from this and the remaining Circulatory, Violence. classes were slightly above the average, with the exception of diseases of the Heart and Circulation, which with deaths from Violence were somewhat less than the average. 158 The following Table exhibits the annual number of deaths that resulted from non-zymotic diseases during the eleven years 1880-91, with the increase or decrease of deaths in 1891 compared with the annual average number in 1881-90 raised in proportion to increase of population:— TABLE VII. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF NON-ZYMOTIC MORTALITY. Causes of Death. 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1891 No above corrected average. No. below corrected average. Constitutional. Tubercular 51 69 64 85 90 87 111 114 72 99 107 • • 8 Other Constitutional 19 19 20 18 28 30 32 30 32 48 31 • • 6 Local. Nervous 121 106 116 128 145 151 115 112 90 103 104 • • 35 Circulatory 28 28 25 22 36 46 32 45 26 4.6 39 • • 3 Respiratory 90 87 69 70 101 135 110 128 87 177 201 67 • • Digestive 28 28 35 47 22 30 30 34 31 42 51 9 • • Urinary 4 20 13 15 12 26 17 22 17 17 22 2 • • Generative • • 4 • • 3 6 4 2 5 5 6 9 4 5 • • Locomotory 2 1 .. 2 2 • • 1 • • 2 2 2 5 • • Integumentary • • 1 • • • • 3 • • • • 1 • • 1 • • = = Developmental. Premature 37 27 23 40 37 45 38 41 36 54 66 18 • • Birth Malformation Low Vitality Age 27 27 33 42 34 32 36 25 33 24 27 • • 10 Violence 20 18 32 21 15 17 13 23 15 27 24 • • 16 Ill-defined or 4 1 • • • • • • 3 2 4 1 2 2 • • • • Not specified The next Table shews the proportion per cent. which the total deaths, as well as those that resulted from zymotic diseases, bore in relation to the social position of the deceased during the past year in comparison with the average proportion of the previous ten years. By a 159 reference to the figures it will be seen that the diminution in the total mortality, as well as in that resulting from zymotic disease which has been slightly, but perceptibly, taking place for many years amongst the industrial classes has continued during the past year. This satisfactory result furnishes reliable evidence of the certain albeit slow progress in the work of sanitation. Such progress must be necessarily slow until the public, and especially that section of it which suffers most from insanitary conditions and knows least of what these conditions are, becomes educated to a recognition of the importance of sanitary knowledge; and here I would remark that much good in this direction would be undoubtedly accomplished if some simple rudimentary instruction on the natural laws relating to the maintenance of a healthy existence were introduced into Board Schools, and indeed all other Schools. TABLE VIII. Social Position. Total Deaths. Deaths from Zymotic Diseases. 1891. Decennial average. 1891. Decennial Average.[/##] Nobility and Gentry 3.3 3.06 1.03 0.74 Professional Class, Merchants, Bankers, &c. 5.0 5.16 2.06 5.46 Middle & Trading Classes, Clerks, &c 28.2 24.41 22.68 18.43 Industrial and Labouring Classes 63.5 67.37 74.23 75.37 100.00 100.00 100. 00 100.00 Infantile Mortality. The actual death-rate of infants determined from the number of births registered and the number of deaths that occurred under one year of age during the year was 11.89 per cent., the decennial average being 13.1 per cent. 160 The relative death-rate, or the proportion of deaths borne by infants under one year to the total mortality was 24.35 per cent., the decennial average being 25.7 per cent. Senile Mortality. The deaths that occurred at 70 years of age and upwards numbered 118, and were 16 in excess of those of the previous year. They formed 15.1 per cent. of all deaths, the decennial average being 12.4. The sex and age of the deceased, with the numbers at different periods, are shewn in the subjoined Table. The females, as usual, are seen to have greatly exceeded the males both in number and longevity:— TABLE IX. Age. Males. Females. Total. At 70 and under 75 19 27 46 75 „ „ 80 18 23 41 80 „ „ 85 5 9 14 85 „ „ 90 2 11 13 90 „ „ 94 1 3 4 45 73 118 Table XII.. on page 33 of the Introductory Sickness and Mortality amongst the Parochial poor Report of the entire district, shews the nature, amount, and fatality of the disease that prevailed amongst the Parochial Poor during the year. The total separate cases that came under treatment amounted to 857, and were 34 more, and the total deaths 31 or one more than in 1890. The figures generally will be found to corroborate those in the Table of general Mortality as regards the prevalence and intensity of disease that prevailed throughout the whole Sub-district. Thus the most prevalent of the NonZymotic diseases were those of the Organs of Respiration, 161 which am ounted to 203, and resulted in 13 deaths; although not so numerous by 37 as in the previous year, they were attended with nearly double the mortality; in this latter respect corresponding with the greater fatality of Influenza, to the effects of which disease they were for the most part attributable. The total cases of Epidemic disease were 76, to which number Influenza, Measles, and Diarrhoea contributed 54; the deaths were 4 only. In the previous year the total cases were 135, with 8 deaths. Inquests,Death from Violence. Inquests concerning the deaths of 53 persons 43 males, 10 females—were held during the year. The number is 9 less than in 1890. The deaths were thus assigned:—To natural causes, 28; and to Violence, 26, of which 13 were the result of Accident; 6 of Suicide; 2 of Execution; 1 of Manslaughter; 1 of Murder; and in two instances the cause of death was undetermined, and a verdict of "Found dead" returned. Further details are given in the following Table:— TABLE X. Male. Females. Total. Deaths from natural causes 22 6 28 „ „ violence, viz.:— Accidental 'From a fall 3 • • 13 Wound of finger 1 • • Choked by a bone in • • 1 the gullet Suffocation in bed with 2 — parents Drowning 3 — Injury to back 1 — Fracture of skull, 1 — knocked down by train \Run over by a cart 1 — Suicidal Drowning 1 1 6 Cut throat 1 — Pistol shot 2 — Hanging 1 — 162 Sanitation. The Sanitary measures that were carried out during the year .are tabulated as far as is practicable on page 35 of the Introductory Report on the entire district. The figures, which in the aggregate represent a vast amount of Sanitary woi'k, will be found to shew a great increase in some of their numbers, especially of those relating to the inspection of houses and premises, and the remedying of their sanitary defects, as well as to the general removal of nuisances. The number of houses and premises inspected was 5,471, shewing an increase over that of the previous year of 538. In addition to the systematic routine of inspection, every house in which infectious disease of any kind is known to have occurred is disinfected, as well as thoroughly examined, and any existing defects remedied. The number disinfected during the year was 263, or 139 less than in the previous year, the reduction not having been due to a relaxation in the performance of this most important measure of prevention, but more fortunately to a less prevalence of epidemic disease and consequently less necessity for its employment; for the same reason the number of notices served was correspondingly less. Amongst the numerous items in the Table shewing a satisfactory increase is the disconnecting of sinks, bath and lavatory waste pipes, and rain-water pipes from house-drains— one of the greatest of modern sanitary improvements ; under this head theie was an increase of 360, and the proceeding is continuously pursued. The number under Homicidal Fracture of skull 1 — 4 slaughter Suffocation Wilful — 1 Murder Executior 2 — Undetermined "Found dead" 1 1 2 43 10 53 163 the head of "Water-closets cleansed and repaired" is also 346 in excess. In the disinfection of houses sulphur-fumigation has been, as usual, employed and continues to give most satisfactory results. At the same time disinfectants are supplied to the occupier of the house for its general purification, aand where necessary the clothes and bedding of the patient are handed over to the contractor for purification by super-heated steam. Out of the whole 263 houses so dealt with there was a recurrence of disease in 5 only, and in two of these the recurrence beyond the period of incubation of the disease was doubtful. Such result is very satisfactory when it is considered that 75 per cent. of all cases of infectious disease were treated at the patients' homes. The number of complaints brought to the notice of the Local Committee and investigated by them amounted to 1,263, and was 159 more than in the year previous. The Cow-houses and Slaughter-houses in the Subdistrict (the former numbering 16 and the latter 8) were all examined and certified as being in a satisfactory condition prior to a renewal of their owners' licenses. All the Bake-houses also (39 in number) were inspected twice in the year and found in a satisfactory condition, with two exceptions in which notices to cleanse, &c., were served upon the occupiers and at once complied with. In conclusion, I have much pleasure in again testifying to the zealous manner in which the Sanitary Inspectors have fulfilled their respective duties. GEORGE EDWARD NICHOLAS, M.D., June 18th,1892. Medical Officer of Health for Wandsworth. 164 REPORT BY THE PUBLIC ANALYST foe the tear 1891. To the Board of Works for the Wandsworth District. Gentlemen, In accordance with the annual custom, I beg to submit a report of the work done in my department under the Sale of Food and Drugs Act during the year 1891. The total number of samples submitted by the Inspector was 230, which number will, however, be increased during the year 1892, in compliance with a resolution of the Board, passed late in 1891, to that effect. The articles examined wore thus made up:- Nature of Article. Number submitted. Milk 75 Butter 41 Coffee 17 Pepper 14 Mustard 14 Drugs 11 Arrowroot 10 Sugar 8 Condensed Milk 8 Jam 6 Tea 5 Flour 5 Olive Oil 4 Cocoa 3 Oatmeal 2 Lard 2 Vinegar 2 Pickles 2 Preserved Peas 1 165 The total number of articles positively condemned was 23: thus shewing that 10 per cent. of the whole were definitely adulterated. The following Tables show the nature and amounts of the impurities detected:— TABLE I.—Dairy products. [###Articles submitted. Amount of Impurity. Butter 100 per cent. Butter 85 „ Butter 75 „ Milk 18 „ Milk 17 „ Milk 17 „ Milk 14 „ Milk 13 „ Milk 13 „ Milk 10 „ Milk 9 „ Milk 8 „ Milk 8 „ Milk 7 „ Milk 5 „ Milk 5 „ Milk 3 „ Milk 2 „ The above Table shows that the definite adulteration of dairy products amounted to very nearly 13 per cent. of the whole number of samples examined. In addition to these, however, many other samples were found to be of a very poor and even of a probably diluted nature, but, as to them, it was impossible to certify because they had not been so far tampered with as to bring them below the limit of the poorest possible genuine milk. 166 TABLE II.—Groceries. Articles submitted. Amount of Impurity. Pepper 50 per cent. of Rice. Olive Oil 100 per cent. of Mineral Oil. Tinned Peas 2 grains of Sulphate of Copper per lb. The olive oil case was evidently not one of adulteration, but of selling a wrong article, and the offender was duly punished. In the tinned peas case the wording of the Act prevented prosecution, because any vendor may colour or stain an article to improve its appearance provided he does not thereby render it actually dangerous to health, and I felt myself unable to certify that such peas, which are eaten daily by hundreds of people without any apparent effect, were actually dangerous to health in the decided sense required by the Act now in force. Whether any metallic salts being themselves poisonous in free doses, should be allowed to be added to food even in minute quantities, is a matter deserving, in my opinion, the attention of the Legislature. TABLE I I I.-Drugs. Nature of Article. Amount of adulteration. A mixture containing Salicylate of Soda 25 per cent. deficiency. Spirit of Nitrous Ether Contained only one-fifth of the proper amount of its active ingredient. The spirit of nitrous ether case could not be proceeded with because the drug had been asked for by its popular name of "Sweet Spirit of Nitre," and it is not so called in the present Pharmacopoeia. That "Sal volatile" should be included while "Sweet Nitre" is left out is a matter that deserves the attention of the Medical Council, because, while granting a legal standard to one popular drug, it denies it to another in equally common demand. At present any purchaser can depend on getting proper Aromatic Spirit of Ammonia if he asks for it by its 167 familiar name of "Sal volatile," but, should he want efficient Spirit of Nitrous Ether, he must discard the old "Sweet nitre," or put up with whatever the dealer chooses to sell him. It is worth noting, however, that this article was not bought in the shop of a properly licensed chemist and the moral is evidently that the public should go for drugs to qualified Pharmacists. The other case is the first instance in which we have ever caught a chemist committing a mistake at his dispensing counter, and there is every reason to hope that the matter was accidental, because all our experience of the last 18 years goes to show that, in our district, the qualified Pharmacists are in the habit of performing their duties in a most satisfactory manner. I have the honour to be, Gentlemen, Your obedient servant, JOHN MUTER, Ph.D.; F.R.S. (Edin.); F.I.C., Public Analyst.